All praise be to Allah alone , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
Most Compassionate , Ever - Merciful .
Master of the Day of Judgment .
( O Allah ! ) You alone do we worship and to You alone we look for help .
Show us the straight path .
The path of those upon whom You have bestowed Your favours .
Not of those who have been afflicted with wrath and nor of those who have gone astray .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
( This is ) the Glorious Book in which there is no chance of doubt . ( It is ) a guide for those who guard against evil and fear Allah .
Those who believe in the unseen , and establish prayer ( fulfilling all requisites ) and spend ( in Our way ) out of what We have given them .
And those who believe in ( all ) that which has been revealed to you and that which was revealed before you , and also have ( perfect ) faith in the life after death .
It is they who follow Guidance from their Lord and it is they who shall achieve real success .
Verily those who have adopted disbelief , it is the same for them whether you warn them or you warn them not , they will not believe .
Allah ( as a result of their own choice ) has set a seal on their hearts and their ears and there is a blindfold ( set ) over their eyes . And for them there is severe torment .
And amongst people there are ( also ) some who say : We believe in Allah and the Day of Judgment , whereas they are not ( at all ) believers .
They seek to deceive Allah ( i . e . the Messenger ) and the believers but ( in fact ) they deceive only themselves and they are not aware of it .
In their hearts is a disease . So Allah has worsened their disease . For them , there is painful punishment because they used to tell lies .
When it is said to them : Do not spread disorder in the land , they say : It is we who reform .
Beware ! ( Truly ) it is they who spread disorder , but they do not have any sense ( of it ) at all .
And when it is said to them : Believe as ( other ) people have believed , they say : Shall we also believe ( as those ) fools have believed ? Beware ! ( Certainly ) they are themselves fools but they do not know ( their foolishness and low level ) .
And when they ( the hypocrites ) meet the believers , they say : We ( too ) have believed , and when they meet their devils in privacy they assure them : We are certainly with you . We only mock ( the believers ) .
Allah punishes them for their mockery and lets them loose ( so that they meet their fate ) . So they are wandering blindly in their transgression .
These are the people who have purchased misguidance for guidance ; but their trade did not yield any gain and they did not know the way to ( gainful and profitable ) bargain .
Their example is like a person who lit a fire ( in surrounding darkness ) and when it brightened the environment , Allah took away their light and left them in total darkness . Now they cannot see anything .
They are deaf , dumb and blind . So they will not return ( to the right path ) .
Or their example is like a rain pouring from the sky wherein there are layers of darkness , thunder and lightning ( as well ) . They thrust their fingers into their ears fearing death owing to thunder . And Allah has encompassed the disbelievers .
It seems as if the lightning would snatch away their sight .
When their ( surroundings ) are lit with a flash , they start walking
and when darkness covers them , they stand still .
And if Allah willed , He could deprive them absolutely of hearing and sight .
Surely Allah is All - Powerful to do everything .
O People ! Worship your Lord Who created you and ( also ) those who were before you , so that you become God - wary .
( He is the One ) Who spread out the earth for you as a floor , and erected the sky as a mansion , and showered water from the sky and brought forth with that ( a variety of ) fruits for your nourishment .
So , do not set up equals with Allah while you know ( the truth of the matter ) .
And if you are in doubt about this ( Book ) which We have revealed to Our ( exalted ) servant , then produce only one chapter like this . And ( for this task ) you may call upon ( all ) your helpers apart from Allah , if you are true ( in your doubt and denial ) .
But if you fail to do it and you shall never be able to do it then guard yourselves against the Fire whose fuel is human beings ( the disbelievers ) and stones ( their idols ) which is prepared for disbelievers .
And , ( O Beloved , ) give glad tidings to those who believe and keep doing pious deeds that for them there are gardens ( of Paradise ) beneath which streams flow .
When some fruit will be given to them from these gardens to eat they will say ( looking at its appearance ) :
This is the same fruit that was provided to us ( in the world ) before ,
whereas they shall be given fruits resembling ( only in appearance ) .
In Paradise there will ( also ) be chaste spouses for them and they shall abide there forever .
Indeed Allah is not reluctant to narrate some example ( for better comprehension ) , whether of a mosquito or something even more ( disgusting ) than that .
The believers know well that this example is a ( pointer to the Truth ) from their Lord .
But those who have adopted disbelief ask ( on hearing ) : What could Allah mean by this example ?
( In this way ) Allah holds many astray and guides many aright with the same example .
And by this He leaves in error only those who are ( already ) disobedient .
( These disobedient people are those ) who break the promise of Allah after having confirmed it , and break that ( relationship ) which Allah has ordered to join , and create disorder in the land . It is they who are the losers .
How can you deny Allah whereas you were lifeless and He gave you life , then He will cause you to die and will again bring you back to life , and then to Him will you be returned ?
He is the One Who created for you all that is in the earth . Then He turned towards higher regions ( of the universe ) and perfected them into seven heavenly firmaments . And He has full knowledge of everything .
And ( call to mind ) when your Lord said to the angels : I am about to place My deputy on the earth . They submitted : Will You put as Your ( vicegerent ) on the earth such as will do mischief in it and shed blood , while we are engaged in glorifying You with celebrating Your Praise and extolling Your Holiness ( all the time ) ? ( Allah ) said : I know that which you do not know .
And Allah taught Adam the names of all ( things ) , and then set them before the angels and said : Tell Me the names of these things if you are true ( in your assumption ) .
The angels ( humbly ) submitted : Glory to You , You are Holy ( Free from every deficiency ) . We have no knowledge except that which You have taught us . Surely , You alone are All - Knowing , All - Wise .
Allah said : O Adam , ( now ) apprise them of the names of these things . So when Adam had told them the names of those things , ( Allah ) said : Did I not tell you I know ( all ) the hidden realities of the heavens and the earth and also know all that you disclose and all that you conceal ?
And ( also recall the time ) when We commanded the angels : Prostrate yourselves before Adam . Then they all prostrated themselves to Adam except Iblis ( Satan ) . He refused and showed arrogance and ( consequently ) became one of the disbelievers .
And We ordained : Adam , reside you and your wife in this Paradise and eat of it , both of you , whatever you like and from wherever you will . But do not go near this tree lest you ( join ) the transgressors .
Then Satan shook them from that place and removed them from the ( blissful ) location where they were . And ( eventually ) We ordained : Go down ( and live in the earth ) ; you will remain enemies to each other , and now in the earth has been destined a dwelling place and sustenance for you for a fixed time .
Then Adam learnt some words ( of humility and repentance ) from his Lord . So Allah accepted his repentance . Surely He is the One Who is Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
We said : Leave it ( the Paradise and settle in the earth ) all of you . Then if there comes to you Guidance from Me , whoever will follow My Guidance , neither shall any fear ( obsess ) them nor shall they grieve .
And those who disbelieve and deny Our Revelations , it is they who shall be the inmates of Fire . They shall abide in it forever .
O Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) ! Recall My favours which I bestowed upon you and fulfil the promise ( made ) to Me , I shall fulfil the promise ( made ) to you . And always fear Me alone .
And believe in ( the Book ) that I have revealed ( to My Messenger Muhammad , [ blessing and peace be upon him ] ) while it confirms ( originally ) that which you possess . And do not be the first to deny it nor barter My Revelations for a small ( worldly ) price . And fear Me alone .
And do not mix up the truth with falsehood nor conceal the truth deliberately .
And establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly and kneel down ( together ) with those who kneel down .
Do you command others for piety and forget yourselves , while you ( also ) recite the Book ( of Allah ) ? So , do you not think ?
And seek ( Allahs ) help through patience and Prayer . But this is no doubt hard except for the humble ( whose hearts have been softened with the Love of Allah and gripped with His Fear ) .
( It is they ) who are certain that they are about to meet their Lord and to Him are they going to return .
O Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) ! Recall those favours that I bestowed upon you and that I exalted you above all the people ( of your age ) .
And fear that Day when no soul shall be able to pay any compensation on behalf of another .
Nor shall any intercession be accepted from him ( of a person who shall not have Allahs permission to intercede ) .
Nor shall any compensation be accepted from him ( for his own salvation ) .
And they will not be helped ( against Allahs decree ) .
And ( also call to your mind the time ) when We delivered you from Pharaohs people , who used to inflict severe torment upon you : they slaughtered your sons and kept your daughters alive . There was an arduously terrible trial in it from your Lord .
And when We parted the river ( to rescue you ) and ( in this way ) delivered you and ( on the contrary ) We drowned Pharaohs people before your eyes .
And ( also recall the time ) when We made an appointment with Musa ( Moses ) for forty nights . Then after Musa ( Moses went into retreat ) you took the calf as ( your ) god for worship and you were no doubt aweful transgressors .
Then We pardoned you ( even ) after that so that you might give thanks .
And when We bestowed upon Musa ( Moses ) the Book and the miracle distinguishing the truth from falsehood so that you might take the path of guidance .
And when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : O my people , no doubt you have ( seriously ) wronged your own souls in taking the calf ( as your god ) . Now turn in repentance to your Creator ( the True Sustainer ) .
So , kill one another ( among yourselves so that those who have not taken the calf for worship and stuck to their religion should kill those who worshipped the calf as punishment for turning away from their religion .
This ( act ) would be the best ( repentance ) for you in the sight of your Creator .
Then He accepted your repentance .
Surely , He is Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
And when you said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! We will never believe in you until we see Allah completely unveiled ( before our eyes ) . So , ( on this ) a thunder seized ( and eliminated ) you , and you kept watching ( this spectacle yourselves ) .
Then We brought you back to life after your death so that you pay ( Us ) thanks .
And ( recall ) when We cast the shade of clouds over you ( in the Tiha valley ) and sent down for you manna and quails so that you might eat of the pure things We provided for you . So they did not harm Us at all ( by disobeying and showing Us disregard ) but harmed persistently their own souls .
And ( remember ) when We said : Enter this city and eat as much as you wish from wherever you desire but enter ( the city ) gate prostrating and praying : ( O our Lord ! ) We seek forgiveness ( for all of our sins ) . We shall ( then ) forgive your ( previous ) sins and , ( besides , ) We shall bestow more ( favours and blessings ) upon the righteous .
But ( those ) transgressors substituted some other phrase in place of that which was said to them . So We sent down a calamity from heaven on ( those ) evildoers ( in the form of plague ) because they were disobeying ( persistently ) .
And ( recall also the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) prayed for water for his people . We directed : Strike that rock with your stick . Then twelve springs gushed out of that ( rock ) . Verily each clan identified their respective drinking place . ( We said : ) Eat and drink of the sustenance ( given ) by Allah but do not seek doing mischief in the land .
And when you said : O Musa ( Moses ) , we cannot be content with only one kind of food ( i . e . manna and quails ) , so pray to your Lord ( in our favour ) that He may bring forth for us of cultivated produce : green herbs , cucumbers , wheat , garlic , lentils and onions .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said ( to his people ) : Do you demand something inferior in exchange for something superior ? ( And if that is what you wish then ) go down to any city . Surely ( there ) will be ( available ) all what you demand .
Then dishonour and deprivation were brought upon them and they incurred the wrath of Allah because they used to deny the Signs of Allah and kill the Prophets unjustly .
This was also because they used to disobey and would ( always ) exceed limits .
Verily , those who have believed , and ( those who were ) Jews and Christians and Sabians , those ( of them ) who believe in Allah and the Last Day and act piously , there is for them their reward with their Lord . Neither shall any fear obsess them , nor shall they grieve .
And ( recall ) when We took a firm promise from you and raised the Mount of Sinai high above you , so that you hold fast firmly what We have given you . And bear in mind whatever is ( written ) in this ( Book , the Torah , ) so that you become pious .
Yet you turned back after this ( promise and warning ) . So , had there not been Allahs Bounty and His Mercy upon you , you would have been wrecked indeed .
And , ( O Jews , ) certainly you know well those of you who violated ( the injunctions concerning ) the Sabbath ( Saturday ) . So We said to them : Be you apes , rejected and despised .
So We made this ( event ) a lesson of warning for their contemporaries as well as for later generations , and ( a source of ) admonition for the pious .
And ( also recollect the event ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : Verily , Allah enjoins you to sacrifice a cow . They said : Do you make a fool of us ? Musa ( Moses ) said : I seek the protection of Allah ( against ) becoming one of the ignorant .
( Then ) they said : Pray for us to your Lord that He may make clear to us what kind of cow ( that ) shall be ? ( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Certainly He ordains that the cow is to be neither old nor young ( heifer ) , but in between ( fully grown ) . So now implement what you have been ordered .
They ( again ) said : Pray to your Lord for us that He may specify what her colour should be . Musa ( Moses ) said : He says , the cow should be yellow , rich in tone , ( so attractive that ) it pleases the viewers .
( This time ) they said : Pray for us to your Lord that He may make clear to us what exact type of cow it is ( because ) the cow has become doubtful to us , and if Allah so wills , we shall indeed be guided aright .
( Musa [ Moses ] said , ) Allah has ordained : ( That is not any inferior cow . Instead ) it is certainly ( a superior ) cow , which has been employed neither for ploughing nor for watering the field , a cow in sound health , without any blemish . They said : Now you ( have ) brought the truth . So they sacrificed it though they did not look like doing it .
And when you killed a man then started disputing among yourselves ( for its blame ) , and Allah was to unveil that event which you were concealing .
Then We commanded : Strike this ( dead body ) with a piece of this ( cow ) . That is how Allah restores the dead to life ( or will give life to the dead on the Day of Resurrection , ) and shows you His Signs so that you may apply your knowledge and understanding .
Then ( even ) after this your hearts hardened . So ( in hardness ) they ( have become ) like stones or even harder .
For of stones there are some from which streams burst out ; and , certainly , some out of them are such ( stones ) that split up and water gushes out of them ;
nd indeed there are others of them that fall due to fear of Allah .
( Alas ! Your hearts have not remained even that much soft , tender and feeble ) and Allah is not unaware of what you do .
( O Muslims ! ) Do you expect that they ( the Jews ) will believe in you whereas amongst them were people of a group who heard the Word of Allah ( Taurat [ the Torah ] ) then altered it ( themselves ) after understanding it , although they knew well ( what the Truth was and what they were doing ) ?
And ( they have reached such state ) when they meet the believers they say : We ( too ) have believed ( in Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , like you ) ,
and when they are together in isolation , they say : Do you tell them ( the Muslims ) that which Allah has unfolded to you ( through the Torah in connection with the Prophethood and glory of the last of the Prophets , Muhammad , blessings and peace be upon him ) so that they may use it in argument against you in the Holy Presence of your Lord ? Do you not have ( even this much ) sense ?
Are they not aware that Allah knows full well all that they hide and all that they show ?
And among them ( the Jews , some ) are illiterate ( as well ) who do not know ( even the bare minimum about the meaning and connotations of ) the Book ( except hearsay and false hopes ) . They know only to recite ( the Book ) verbally and follow mere speculation and assumption .
So , a serious disaster awaits those who write the Book with their own hands , then say : This is from Allah , just to earn a paltry price against that . So they will face destruction ( owing to the Book ) that their hands have written and ( for the compensation ) that they are earning .
And they ( the Jews also ) say : The Fire ( of Hell ) shall not touch us except for a small number of days . ( Just ) ask ( them ) : Have you obtained ( such ) a promise from Allah ? Then He will never violate His promise . Or do you make inadvertently ( such an ) allegation against Allah which you do not know yourselves .
Of course he who adopts evil and is encompassed by his sins , it is they who are the inmates of Hell . They are its permanent residents .
And those who have believed and have done pious deeds , it is they who are the inhabitants of Paradise . They shall live there forever .
And ( remember ) when We took a firm promise from the Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) : Do not worship ( anyone ) besides Allah , and be nice to the parents and ( do good to ) the kindred and orphans and the needy .
And ( also ) talk of piety to the common people ( in a polite and nice manner ) . And establish Prayer and pay on Zakat ( the Alms - due ) .
Then , except a few , all the rest of you turned back ( from the promise , ) and you are but averse ( to the Truth ) .
And when We took from you ( this ) solemn covenant ( as well ) : You shall not shed one anothers blood ( among yourselves ) nor shall you expel your people ( from their homes and townships ) . Then you agreed ( to implement it ) and you ( also ) bear witness ( to it ) .
Yet it is you who are killing your own people and banishing a section of your own folk from their homeland , and ( furthermore ) helping ( their enemies ) with sin and transgression against them .
And if they come to you as captives , you ransom their release ( so that they remain obliged to you ) whereas it had been forbidden to you to exile them from their homeland .
Do you believe in some parts of the Book and deny some others ? So he who does so from amongst you , what can be his punishment but disgrace ( and humiliation ) in the worldly life
and ( also ) on the Day of Resurrection ( such people ) will be returned to the most ruthless torment . And Allah is not unaware of your deeds .
It is they who have purchased the worldly life for the Hereafter . So neither will their torment be lessened nor will they be helped .
And surely We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book ( the Torah ) and sent ( many ) Messengers after him in succession .
And We gave Isa , son of Maryam , ( Jesus , son of Mary , ) as well luminous Signs and strengthened ( and supported ) him by means of the Holy Spirit .
But ( what followed is that ) whenever a Messenger brought to you ( the Commandments ) whom your ( ill - commanding ) selves disliked , you adamantly resisted there and then . You belied some of them and started killing others .
And the Jews said : Our hearts are wrapped up in covers . ( Nay , ) but Allah has cursed them for their revolt against faith . So , little do they believe .
And when the Book ( the Quran ) came to them from Allah which ( originally ) validates that Book ( the Torah ) which was with them , whereas , before this , they themselves used to pray for victory over the disbelievers ( through the intermediation of the Last Prophet , Muhammad , [ blessing and peace be upon him , ] and the Holy Quran revealed to him ) ,
but when came to them the same Prophet ( Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , along with the Book revealed to him , the Quran ) whom they had ( already ) recognized , they denied him . So Allahs curse is upon such ( deliberate ) disbelievers .
How evil a bargain they made in exchange for their lives : that they deny the Book revealed by Allah merely begrudging that Allah bestows ( His revelation ) out of His Bounty upon any of His servants He wills . So they earned manifold wrath of Allah and there is a humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
And when it is said to them : Believe in this ( Book ) which Allah has ( now ) revealed , they say : We believe only in that ( Book ) which was revealed to us , and they deny all other than that , whereas this ( Quran ) is ( also ) the Truth ( and ) confirms that ( Book as well ) which they possess . Ask ( them ) : Then why have you been killing the Prophets of Allah before this if you ( really ) believe ( but in your own Book ) ?
And ( the fact remains that ) Musa ( [ Moses ] himself ) brought you clear Signs . Then you took the calf as god after him . And you are but wicked ( without any doubt ) .
And when We took a firm promise from you and We raised the Mount of Sinai high above you ( saying ) : Hold fast to this ( Book ) which We have given you and listen ( to Our Commandment ) . Then ( your chiefs ) said : We have heard but not obeyed . And owing to their revolt against faith ( kufr ) , their hearts were imbued with the love of the calf .
( O Beloved , ) say ( to them ) : These utterances are ( most ) vile which your ( so - called ) faith commands you , if you believe ( in them truly ) .
Say : If in the sight of Allah the dwelling in the Hereafter is reserved for you alone and not for others , then long for death ( without any fear ) if ( you presume ) you are truthful .
But they will never long for it because of the sins ( and atrocities ) their hands have sent ahead ( or have committed already ) and Allah knows the wrongdoers full well .
And you will certainly find them the most ambitious of mankind for longevity , ( even ) more than the polytheists aspire to attain . Each one of them desires that he should be granted life of a thousand ( years ) . But even if he is granted , such a prolonged life cannot save him from the torment . And Allah is monitoring their deeds minutely .
Say : Whoever is an enemy to Jibril ( [ Gabriel ] he is doing injustice ) , because he is the one who has brought down upon your heart only by Allahs Command ( the Quran which ) confirms the preceding ( Books ) and contains ( absolute ) guidance and glad tidings for the believers .
He who is an enemy to Allah , His angels , His Messengers and Gabriel and Michael , verily Allah ( too ) is an enemy to ( these ) disbelievers .
And certainly We have sent down to you luminous Signs and none but the disobedient can deny them .
And is it ( not so ) that every time they made a promise , a party of them disregarded and threw it aside ? The fact is that most of them do not believe .
And ( likewise ) when there came to them from Allah the Messenger , ( Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , ) who ( originally ) confirms that Book which they ( already ) possessed , a party of these People of the Book threw the ( same ) Book of Allah ( the Torah ) behind their backs as if they did not know
( it , whereas the same Torah had brought them the good news of the holy arrival of Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , the Last Prophet ) .
And they ( the Jews ) pursued that ( magic as well ) which the devils used to recite during the reign of Sulaiman ( Solomon ) .
Sulaiman ( Solomon ) did not disbelieve ( any way ) .
It was in fact the devils that disbelieved .
They used to teach witchcraft to the people and ( also ) pursued that ( sorcery ) which was sent down upon the two angels named Harut and Marut in the city of Babylon .
They both did not teach anything to anyone , so much so that they would say : We are merely ( for ) trial , therefore , do not become disbelievers ( by putting faith in it ) .
In spite of that those ( Jews ) used to learn such ( magic ) from both of them by which they caused separation between husband and wife .
Yet they cannot harm anyone by this except under the Command of Allah .
And they learn only the things which are harmful to them and bring them no profit .
And surely they ( also ) knew that he who would buy this ( sorcery or disbelief ) would not have any share in the Hereafter .
And most evil is that for which they sold ( the real well - being or the success of ) their souls ( in the Hereafter ) .
Would that they knew ( the truth of ) this ( bargain ) !
But if they had believed and become God - fearing , ( even a little ) reward from Allah would have been far better ( than all these things ) . If they but knew ( this secret ) !
O Believers ! ( Seeking the kind attention of the Holy Prophet , ) do not say : Raina ( pay attention to us ) , but submit ( most humbly ) : Unzurna ( bless us with your benevolent gaze ! ) , and be all ears ( towards his gracious discourse ) . And there is grievous torment for the disbelievers .
Neither the disbelievers among the People of the Book nor the polytheists like that any blessing should descend upon you from your Lord . And Allah especially chooses whom He pleases for His Mercy . And Allah possesses Infinite Bounties .
When We abrogate some verse or cause it to be forgotten , ( in either case ) We bring ( some other verse ) better than or similar to it . Do you not know that Allah has ( Absolute ) Control over everything ?
Do you not know that the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone , and that you have neither any friend nor helper aside from Allah ?
( O Muslims ! ) Do you also want to ask your Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) questions the way Musa ( Moses ) was asked before ? So he who changes belief for disbelief , for sure , loses the right path .
Many of the People of the Book desire to turn you back to disbelief after you have believed because of the jealousy they have in their hearts , despite the fact that the Truth has become evident to them . So keep forbearing and overlooking till Allah sends His Command . Verily Allah has ( Absolute ) Control over everything .
And ( always ) establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly . And whatever virtue you will send ahead , you shall find it with Allah . Surely Allah is watching all that you are doing .
And ( the People of the Book ) say : No one will enter Paradise except he who is a Jew or a Christian . These are their false hopes . Say : Produce your proof ( in favour of this desire ) if you are rightful ( in your claim ) .
Yes , of course , he who submits his face to Allah ( i . e . consigns himself to Allah ) and becomes a man of excellence in piety , he will find his reward with his Lord . Such people will neither fear anything nor grieve .
And the Jews say : The Christians do not have their base upon anything ( i . e . sound faith ) , and the Christians say : The Jews do not have their base upon anything , yet they ( all ) read the Book ( revealed by Allah ) .
Likewise , they ( the polytheists ) who do not have any ( heavenly ) knowledge ( at all ) also make statements like theirs .
So Allah will ( Himself ) judge between them on the Day of Resurrection in the matter in which they differ .
And who is more unjust than he who forbids remembering Allahs Name in His mosques and strives to desolate them ? It was not proper for them to enter the mosques but fearing ( Allah ) . For them is disgrace in this world and ( also ) there is a dreadful torment for them in the Hereafter .
And the East and the West ( all ) belong to Allah alone . So whichever direction you turn to , there is the Presence of Allah ( i . e . the Essence of Allah is radiantly manifest in all directions ) . Surely Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
And they say : Allah has begotten a son for Himself , while Holy and Transcendent is He , far above ( this ) . Rather ( all ) that is in the heavens and in the earth is His ( Creation and belonging and ) all are subservient to Him .
He is the One Who has created the heavens and the earth and when He wills to ( originate ) a thing , He only says to it : Be , and it becomes .
And those who lack knowledge say : Why does Allah not speak to us or why does any Sign not come to us ( directly ) ? Likewise the people before them also said words similar to theirs . The hearts of ( all ) these people are alike . We have indeed made the Signs explicit for those whose faith is firm .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) We have certainly sent you with the Truth as a Bearer of good news and as a Warner . And you will not be asked about the inmates of Hell .
And the Jews and the Christians shall , by no means , be pleased with you ( till ) you follow their religion . Say : Surely , the guidance ( given ) by Allah only is the ( real ) guidance .
( Said for the education of the Umma [ the Community ] : ) And , ( supposing the impossible , ) if you follow their desires after that knowledge which has come to you ( from Allah ) then there will not be any friend or helper for you to protect you from Allah .
( Also there are people ) whom We gave the Book . They recite it as it ought to be recited . It is these people who believe in it ( the Book ) . And those who deny it , it is they who are the losers .
O Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) ! Remember My favour that I bestowed upon you and ( especially ) the supremacy which I awarded you over all the communities ( of that age ) .
And fear that Day when no soul shall be able to recompense anything on behalf of another ; nor shall any ransom be accepted from him ( to deliver himself ) ; nor shall any intercession benefit him ( without Allahs permission ) and nor shall they be helped ( against the Command of Allah ) .
And ( call to mind ) when the Lord of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) tested him with several commands which he fulfilled . ( On this ) Allah said : I am going to make you the leader of mankind . He submitted : And from my children as well ? Allah said : ( Yes , but ) My promise does not apply to the transgressors .
And ( remember ) when We made this House ( the Kaba ) a central place for mankind to turn to ( and assemble ) and a sanctuary for peace and ( commanded : ) Make the place where Ibrahim ( Abraham ) stood as a place of Prayer . And We urged Ibrahim and Ismail ( Abraham and Ishmael ) : Purify ( cleanse ) My House for those who circumambulate it and those who go into retreat and those who kneel down and prostrate themselves .
And when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) prayed : O my Lord , make it a city of peace and bless its residents with a variety of fruits , ( i . e . ) those of them who believe in Allah and the Last Day . ( Allah ) said : And as for him who disbelieves , I shall also grant him enjoyment ( for ) a short span of life , then ( for his disbelief ) shall drive him to the torment of Hell . And that is an extremely evil destination .
And ( recall the time ) when Ibrahim and Ismail ( Abraham and Ishmael ) were raising the foundations of the Kaba ( they were praying : ) O our Lord , accept this ( humble service ) from us . You are , indeed , All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
O our Lord ! Make both of us submissive to Your Command ; and raise out of our future generations an Umma ( a Community ) exclusively obedient to You ; and teach us our ways of worship ( and Pilgrimage ) and turn to us ( with Mercy and Forgiveness ) . Verily , it is You Who are Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
O our Lord ! Raise up from among them the ( Last and the Exalted ) Messenger ( i . e . Muhammad blessings and peace be upon him ) , who shall recite to them Your Revelations , and teach them the Book and wisdom ( logic and good judgment , making them Gnostics of the Divine Secret ) and purify and sanctify well ( their hearts and ill - commanding selves ) .
Certainly You alone are the All - Mighty , All - Wise .
And who turns away from the religion of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) except he who has engaged himself in foolishness . And surely We did choose him in the worldly life and certainly in the Hereafter ( too ) he will be among the high - ranking intimate companions .
And when his Lord commanded him : Bow down ( before Me ) , he submitted : I bow down before the Lord of all the worlds .
And Ibrahim ( Abraham ) enjoined , by way of will , the same thing upon his sons and ( so did ) Yaqub ( Jacob ) : O my sons , verily , Allah has chosen for you the ( true ) Din ( Religion ) of Islam ) . So , ( come what may ) die not but as Muslims persevering with faith .
Were you present ( at the time ) when death approached Yaqub ( Jacob ) when he asked his sons : Whom will you worship after ( my passing away ) ? They said : We shall worship your God , the God of your ancestors Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ismail ( Ishmael ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) , Who is the One and Only God ; and we ( all ) shall remain obedient to Him .
They were an Umma ( Community ) who have passed away . They will have what they earned and you will have what you earn . And you will not be questioned about their doings .
And ( the People of the Book ) say : Become Jews or Christians , then you will be guided aright . Say : ( Nay , not so ; ) the truth is that we have embraced the religion of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) who , far from every falsehood , had turned absolutely to Allah alone . And he was not of the polytheists .
( O Muslims ! ) Say : We believe in Allah and in that ( Book ) which has been revealed to us and ( also ) that which was revealed to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ismail ( Ishmael ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob ) and their children and those ( Books ) too which were given to Musa ( Moses ) and Isa ( Jesus ) and ( likewise ) which were given to other Prophets by their Lord .
We do not make distinction between any of them ( in the matter of faith ) and we have submitted ourselves to Him alone ( the Only , the One God ) .
Then if they ( also ) believe the way you have believed in Him , then they will ( surely ) be guided aright . And if they turn away then ( be clear ) that they are sunk in sheer enmity . So Allah is sufficient to guard you against their evil and He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
( Say that we have taken on the colour from ) Allahs own colour , and whose colour is better than Allahs ? And we worship Him alone .
Say : Do you dispute with us about Allah whereas He is ( not only ) our Lord but your Lord ( too ) ? And ours are our works and yours are your works . And we are truly devoted to Him alone .
( O People of the Book ! ) Do you say that Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ismail ( Ishmael ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) , Yaqub ( Jacob ) and their sons were either Jews or Christians ? Say : Who knows better , you or Allah ? And who will be more unjust than he who hides that testimony which is with him ( in the Book ) from Allah . And Allah is not unaware of your deeds .
That was a community which has passed . For them is what they earned and for you is what you will earn . And you will not be asked about their deeds .
Now the foolish will say : What has turned away these ( Muslims ) from their Qibla ( Bait al - Maqdis in Jerusalem ) to which they used to face ( before ) ? Say : The east and the west ( all ) belong to Allah alone . He guides whom He pleases to the straight path .
And , ( O Muslims , ) in the same way We made you the best Umma ( Community fair to all with a tolerant , moderate and balanced outlook ) so that you may bear witness to the people , and ( Our exalted ) Messenger bears witness to you .
And We appointed the Qibla ( direction of Prayer ) , which you used to face before , only to bring to light ( by trial ) who would follow ( Our ) Messenger and who would turn back upon his heels .
And this ( change of Qibla ) was indeed a hard task but not hard for those whom Allah blessed with guidance ( and gnosis of spiritual truths ) . And it is not Allahs Glory to void your faith ( without any reason ) . Allah is surely Most Clement , Ever - Merciful to mankind .
( O Beloved ! ) We have been watching your radiant face turning frequently towards heaven . So We will indeed make you turn towards that Qibla ( direction of Prayer ) which you feel pleased with . So turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque right now . And , ( O Muslims , ) wherever you are , turn your faces towards it .
And those who have been given the Book definitely know that this ( commandment of changing Qibla ) is the Truth from their Lord .
And Allah is not unaware of the works which they are doing .
And ( even ) if you bring every Sign to the People of the Book , they will not follow your Qibla ( direction of Prayer ) , nor will you follow their Qibla .
And do they not follow each others Qibla among themselves .
( Said for the education of the Umma [ the Community ] : ) And if , ( supposing the impossible , ) you ( also ) follow their desires after the knowledge has come to you , then you will surely be of those who wrong ( their own souls ) .
And those to whom We have given the Book recognize ( the Final ) Messenger ( the Venerable Muhammad [ blessing and peace be upon him ] and his glory and majesty ) as they doubtlessly identify their own sons .
But certainly a party of them is concealing the Truth deliberately .
( O Listener ! ) The Truth is from your Lord . So , never be of those who doubt .
And there is for everyone a ( fixed ) direction ( motive ) ; he turns to the same . So , move forward to take the lead towards the pious acts . Wherever you are , Allah will unite you all together . Surely , Allah has Absolute Control over everything .
And from wherever you move ( on a journey ) , turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque ( at the time of Prayer ) . And this indeed is the Truth from your Lord , and Allah is not unaware of your doings .
And from wherever you move ( on a journey ) , turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque ( at the time of Prayer ) and , ( O Muslims , ) wherever you are , turn your faces towards it so that people may not get a chance to raise any objection against you , except those among them who exceed limits . So , fear them not , fear Me alone , so that I complete My blessing on you and you may attain perfection in guidance .
Likewise , We have sent to you ( Our ) Messenger from among yourselves who recites to you Our Revelations and purifies and sanctifies ( your hearts and ill - commanding selves ) and teaches you the Book and inculcates in you logic and wisdom and enlightens you ( on the mysteries of spiritual gnosis and divine truth ) which you did not know .
So remember Me , I shall remember you . And always be thankful to Me and never be ungrateful to Me .
O Believers ! Always seek help ( from Me ) through patience and Prayer . Certainly , Allah is ( always ) with those who observe patience .
And do not say about those who are slain in the cause of Allah that they are dead . ( They are not dead . ) They are rather alive but you have no perception ( of their life ) .
And We will most certainly test you somewhat by means of fear and hunger and certain loss of wealth and lives and fruits . And , ( O Beloved , ) give glad tidings to those who observe patience .
( They are the ones ) who , when afflicted with some distress , say : Indeed , we too are Allahs ( belongings ) and to Him are we to return .
It is they upon whom are bestowed successive blessings and mercy from their Lord . And it is they who are the guided ones .
Verily Safa and Marwa are indeed among the Signs of Allah . So , he who performs Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) or Umra ( Visitation ) of the House of Allah , there is no sin on him if he ambulates ( i . e . walks up and down between ) the two . And if a person does a pious act out of his pleasure , then Allah is certainly Most Appreciative , Well Aware .
Surely , those who conceal the manifest Signs and guidance sent down by Us after We have revealed them clearly for the people in ( Our ) Book , it is they whom Allah curses ( i . e . deprives them of His Mercy ) and whom curse all those also who curse .
But those who repent , mend ( their ) ways and make known ( the Truth ) , so I ( too ) shall forgive them . And I am Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed those who disbelieved ( by concealing the Truth ) , and left this world while they were disbelievers , upon them is the curse of Allah and of the angels and of all mankind .
They shall be ( held ) under this ( curse ) forever . Their punishment shall not be mitigated . Nor shall they be given respite .
And your God is One God . There is no God but He , the Most Kind , the Ever - Merciful .
Verily in the creation of the heavens and the earth , in the alternation of the night and the day , in the ships ( and vessels ) which sail through the ocean carrying cargo , profitable for the people ,
in the ( rain ) water which Allah pours down from the sky reviving therewith the earth to life after its death , ( the earth ) in which He has scattered animals of all kinds , and in the changing wind directions and in the clouds ( that trail ) between the sky and the earth , duty - bound ( under Allahs Command ) certainly ,
( in these ) are ( many ) Signs ( of Allahs Power ) for those who put their reason to work .
And there are some among the people who take others besides Allah as His partners and love them as it is Allahs due alone . But those who believe love Allah the most ( far more intensely than anyone else ) . And if these wrongdoers happen to see that time when the torment ( of the Last Day ) will be before their eyes ( then they will become aware ) that the Master of all the forces is Allah . And certainly Allah is severe in giving punishment .
And when those ( leaders of the disbelievers ) who were followed would be disgusted with their followers and ( they all ) would see ( Allahs ) torment and all their means and resources would be cut off .
And , ( seeing this disgust , the polytheist ) followers will say : Would that we could get a chance ( to return to the world ) , then we ( too ) would turn our backs on them as they have done to us ( today ) . In this way Allah will show them their own deeds as remorse and regret . And ( no way ) shall they be able to escape from Hell .
O Mankind ! Eat of that which is lawful and pure in the earth . And do not follow in the footsteps of Satan . Verily , he is your declared enemy .
He commands you only to do what is evil and immodest and ( also ) that you should say about Allah that which you ( yourselves ) do not know .
And when it is said to them ( the disbelievers ) : Follow that which Allah has sent down , they say : ( Indeed not ! ) We shall rather follow the same ( path ) on which we found our ancestors , even though their ancestors had neither any sense nor any guidance .
The example of inviting these disbelievers ( to guidance ) is like that of a person who calls out to such ( an animal ) as hears nothing except a shout or cry . Deaf , dumb and blind , they have no sense .
O Believers ! Eat of those pure and clean things which We have provided for you and give thanks to Allah if He is the One Whom you worship ( and obey ) .
He has made unlawful for you only the dead animal and blood and the flesh of swine and that animal over which , while sacrificing , the name of someone other than Allah has been invoked . But he who is forced by necessity and is neither disobedient nor transgressor will not incur any sin on himself ( if he eats that much which is required to survive ) . Allah is , indeed , Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed those who conceal ( those verses of the Torah ) which Allah has revealed and take in exchange for that a small price eat nothing but fill their bellies with Fire . And Allah will not even speak to them nor purify them on the Day of Resurrection . And for them is painful torment .
It is they who have purchased error for guidance and torment for forgiveness . What has made them steadfast to bear the Fire ( of Hell ) ?
This is so because Allah has sent down the Book with the Truth . And indeed those who fabricate contradictions ( and antinomies ) in the Book are far ( gone from the Truth ) in rivalry .
Righteousness is not merely that you turn your faces to the East or the West . But true righteousness is that a person believes in Allah , the Last Day , the angels , the Book ( revealed by Allah ) and the Messengers .
Driven by love for Allah , he spends ( his ) wealth on the kindred , orphans , the needy , the wayfarers , and those who ask and in ( liberating slaves ) necks ; and establishes Prayer and pays Zakat ( the Alms - due ) .
And when they make a promise , they fulfil it and are steadfast in hardship ( poverty ) and suffering ( ailment ) and at the time of fierce fighting ( Jihad ) .
It is these who are truthful and it is these who are righteous .
O Believers ! Retribution ( the law of equality in punishment ) is prescribed for you in the case of those who are unjustly slain : a free man for a free man , a slave for a slave and a woman for a woman .
Then , if he ( the murderer ) is granted some remission ( in retribution ) by his brother ( the victims heir ) , that should be executed fairly according to the law , and ( retribution ) should be paid ( to the heirs of the slain ) in a graceful manner .
This is a concession and kindness from your Lord . So , anyone who transgresses after that , for him there is painful torment .
And there is a ( guarantee of ) life for you in retribution ( i . e . vengeance of murder ) , O wise people , so that you may guard ( against bloodshed and destruction ) .
It is prescribed for you that when death approaches someone of you and he leaves some property behind , then he is to make a will for ( his ) parents and kindred in a reasonable manner . This is imperative for the true believers .
Then he who alters this ( will ) after hearing it , its sin will be on those who alter it . Allah is indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
So , if a person fears any partiality by a testator ( for someone ) or injustice ( towards some other ) and then he brings about reconciliation among them , it shall be no sin on him . Verily Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for the people before you so that you may become pious .
( These are ) a fixed number of days . So , whoever among you is ill or on a journey , then he shall complete fasting for the fixed number by ( fasting on ) other days . But those who are not able to fast , obligatory on them is to provide food for a needy person in lieu of that . But whoever does ( greater ) good seeking pleasure that is better for him . And your fasting is better for you if you understand .
The month of Ramadan ( is that ) in which the Quran has been sent down as guidance for mankind containing clear Signs which lead ( to the straight road ) and distinguish ( the Truth from falsehood ) . Therefore , he who witnesses this month must fast it , and he who is ill or on a journey should complete the count by ( fasting on equal number of ) other days .
Allah desires ease for you and does not desire hardship for you so that you complete the prescribed number of fasting days , and that you glorify Him for the guidance which He has blessed you with , and that you may become grateful .
And , ( O Beloved , ) when My servants ask you about Me , ( tell them : ) I am near . I reply the call of the supplicant whenever he calls Me out . So they should embrace My obedience and have ( firm ) faith in Me so that they may find the ( coveted ) road ( leading straight to the destination ) .
It is made lawful for you to approach your wives during the nights of the fasts .
They are like clothes for you and you are like clothes for them .
Allah knows that you broke the trust in the case of your own right .
But He has shown Mercy to you and has forgiven you .
So , have sexual relations with them now ( during the nights of the fasts without any inhibition ) and seek what Allah has prescribed for you .
And eat and drink until the white thread of dawn becomes distinct to you ( separated ) from the black thread ( of night ) .
Then complete the fast till dusk .
And refrain from having sexual contact with your wives while you are in retreat in the mosques .
These are the bounds ( set ) by Allah . So do not draw near to them ( to step over ) .
Thus Allah explains His Verses ( clearly ) for the people so that they may embrace piety .
And do not eat up one anothers wealth among yourselves through injustice , nor take wealth to the authorities ( as a bribe ) so that , this way , you may ( also ) swallow a portion of others wealth unfairly , while you are aware ( that this is a sin ) .
( O Beloved ! ) People ask you about the new moons . Say : These are Signs to indicate time for the people and for ( determining ) the month of Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) . And it is no righteousness that you enter your houses from the rear ( while in Ihram - the sacred dress for Hajj [ Pilgrimage ] ) . In fact righteousness is doing pious acts ( instead of observing such meaningless customs ) . And enter your houses through their ( entrance ) doors , and always fear Allah so that you may prosper .
And fight in the cause of Allah against those who fight against you . ( Yes , ) but do not exceed limits . Surely Allah does not like those who exceed limits .
And ( during war ) kill ( the disbelievers ) wherever you find them , and drive them out from where they drove you out . And rousing mischief and disruption is a severer ( crime ) than killing . But do not fight against them in the proximity of the Sacred Mosque ( Kaba ) unless they themselves fight there against you .
Then if they attack you , kill them , for that is the right penalty of ( such ) disbelievers .
But if they desist , then surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And keep fighting against them until the disruption and mischief is totally eliminated and Din ( the complete system of life and submission ) practically becomes subservient to Allah alone . But if they desist , then offensive action is not permissible except against the wrongdoers .
A sacred month is the requital of a sacred month and ( other ) sacred things also requite one another . So if someone wrongs you , you may also wrong him but proportional to his offense . And fear Allah . And remember that Allah is with those who fear Him .
And spend in the cause of Allah ; and do not cast yourselves into destruction with your own hands ; and adopt righteousness . Verily , Allah loves the righteous .
And accomplish ( the ceremonies of ) Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) and Umra ( Visitation ) for Allah . But if you are prevented ( in the way ) , then ( send for slaughter ) whatever sacrificial animal is available .
And do not shave your heads until the sacrificial animal has reached its place . But whoever among you is ill or suffers from some ailment of head ( and because of that gets his head shaved before time ) , then he has to recompense ( it ) by ( keeping ) the fast or ( giving ) alms or ( offering ) sacrifice .
Then , when in peaceful condition , anyone of you who takes the advantage of combining Umra ( Visitation ) with Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) should ( offer whatever ) sacrifice is available . However , the one who fails to manage even this has to fast for three days during Hajj ( [ Pilgrimage ] days ) and for seven days on returning from Hajj , making ten days ( fasting ) in all .
This ( relaxation ) is meant for the one whose family does not reside in the vicinity of the Sacred Mosque ( i . e . not a resident of Makka ) . And fear Allah . And remember that Allah gives severe punishment .
Some months are appointed for Hajj ( Pilgrimage : Shawwal , Dhul - Qada and first ten days of Dhul - Hijja ) .
So , he who undertakes to perform Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) during these ( months ) and makes it obligatory ( for himself ) , then he must neither commit sexual intercourse with the women nor any ( other ) sin and nor should he quarrel with anyone during Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) days .
And whatever good you do Allah knows it well .
And collect the provisions required for the journey ( to the Hereafter ) .
And surely the best of provisions is the fear of Allah . So , fear Me , O men of sound judgment !
And it is no sin on you if you seek ( also ) your Lords bounty ( through trade during Hajj [ Pilgrimage ] days ) . Then when you return from Arafat , celebrate the remembrance of Allah near Mashar al - Haram ( Muzdalifa ) . And remember Him as He has guided you . And you were certainly wandering disorientated before .
Then return after going to that very place from where ( the other ) people return . And beg from Allah forgiveness ( earnestly ) . Allah is , of course , Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Then , when you have completed the ceremonies of Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) , celebrate the remembrance of Allah most fervently ( at Mina ) , as you remember your fathers and forefathers ( with great fondness ) , or remember ( Allah ) even with deeper intensity of fondness . There are some of the people who say : O our Lord , grant us benefits in this ( very ) world . For such there is no share in the Hereafter .
And there are others of them who submit : O our Lord , grant us excellence in this world , and excellence in the Hereafter ( as well ) , and save us from the torment of Hell .
It is they for whom there is a share of their ( virtuous ) earning , and Allah is Swift at reckoning .
And remember Allah ( the most ) during ( these ) numbered days . Then , if someone hastens just in two days ( to return from Mina ) , it is no sin on him and he who delays ( it ) also commits no sin . This is for him who embraces piety . And keep fearing Allah and remember that all of you shall be assembled before Him .
And among people there is also someone whose conversation seems to you pleasing in the life of the world and who calls Allah to witness that which is in his heart , but in truth he is most quarrelsome .
And when he turns away ( from you ) , he runs about in the land to do ( everything possible ) to rouse mischief and destroy crops and life . And Allah does not like mischief and violence .
And when it is said to him ( on account of this tyranny and violence ) : Fear Allah , his arrogance stimulates him for more sins . Hell is , therefore , sufficient for him . And that is indeed an evil abode .
And ( on the contrary ) among people there is also someone who sells even his life to attain the pleasure of Allah . And Allah is Most Kind to the servants .
O Believers ! Enter Islam perfectly and wholly and do not follow in the footsteps of Satan . He is certainly your declared enemy .
And if you err even after Our clear Signs have come to you , then bear in mind that Allah is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
Are they waiting only for ( the torment of ) Allah to come in the coverings of clouds , and also the angels ( to descend ) , and the ( whole ) affair is settled ? And to Allah will all matters be returned .
Ask the Children of Israel how many a Clear Sign We gave them ! But he who alters Allahs Bounty after it has reached him then Allah surely inflicts severe torment .
The worldly life has been quite adorned and beautified for the disbelievers . And they make fun of the believers . But those who have embraced God - wariness will rank far superior to them on the Day of Resurrection . And Allah gives without measure to whom He wills .
( In the beginning ) all the people agreed upon the same Din ( Religion . Later , when differences emerged among them , ) Allah sent His Messengers as Bearers of good news and Warners and sent down with them the Book based on Truth , so that it might judge those matters among the people in which they had developed differences .
Then only those very people whom the Book was given differed about it , despite the fact that the clear Signs had come to them .
( And they differed also ) because of mere jealousy and malice among themselves .
Then Allah , by His Command , made the believers understand that matter of Truth about which they had differed .
And Allah guides whom He pleases to the straight road .
Do you think that you will enter Paradise ( for nothing , without any trial , ) while you have not yet undergone the predicament of those who passed away before you ? They were afflicted with a diversity of sufferings and hardships and were jolted ( in such a manner ) that the Messenger ( himself ) and his Companions of faith ( too ) cried out : When will the help of Allah arrive ? Beware ! The help of Allah is definitely at hand .
They ask you what they should spend ( in the way of Allah ) . Say : Whatever wealth you spend ( is right ) , but the deserving ones are your parents , and near relatives , and orphans , and the needy and the wayfarers . And whatever good you do , Allah indeed knows it full well .
Fighting ( for the cause of Allah ) has been made incumbent upon you although you are averse to it by temperament . It may be that you dislike a thing and ( in fact ) that is good for you . And it is ( also ) likely that you like a thing but ( in fact ) that is bad for you . And Allah knows well but you do not know .
They ask you about the command for fighting in the Sacred Month . Say : Fighting in it is a grave sin but hindering people from Allahs path and denying Him and obstructing them from al - Masjid al - Haram ( Kaba ) and turning its dwellers out of it is yet a graver sin ( than that ) in the sight of Allah . And this mischief - mongering is even worse than bloodshed .
( These disbelievers ) will continue fighting against you endlessly till they turn you back from your Din ( Religion ) if they become capable to gain ( the required ) might .
And whoever of you turns away from his Din ( Religion ) and dies as a disbeliever , ( all ) deeds of such people will become void in this world and in the Hereafter .
And it is they who are the inmates of Hell . They shall live in it forever .
Indeed those who believed and migrated for the sake of Allah and struggled hard in the way of Allah , it is they who look forward to Allahs Mercy . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
They ask you about liquor and gambling . Say : Major sin lies in both of them and also some ( worldly ) profit for the people but their sin is greater than their profit . And they also ask you about what they should spend . Say : ( Spend ) whatever is surplus to your needs . Thus does Allah make His Commandments clear to you so that you may meditate .
( Your meditation should be ) on ( matters relating to ) this world and the Hereafter . And they ask you about orphans . Say : It is meritorious to set ( their affairs ) right . And if you associate them with yourselves ( in subsistence and business ) , then they are also your brothers . And Allah distinctly recognizes the one who is destructive from the other who is constructive . And if Allah willed , He would put you in distress . Verily Allah is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
And do not marry idolatrous women until they become Muslims . Indeed a Muslim slave - girl is better than a ( free ) idolatress , however pleasing she may seem to you . Nor give ( the Muslim women ) in marriage to idolaters till they embrace Islam . And certainly a Muslim slave is better than an idolater , even though he should please you . These ( idolaters and disbelievers ) call you to Hell while Allah invites , by His Decree , to Paradise and Forgiveness and explains His Verses clearly to people so that they may take direction and guidance .
And they ask you about menstruation ( monthly course ) . Say : It is filth ; so keep away from women during menstruation and do not approach them until they become pure . And when they have washed themselves clean , consort with them the way by which Allah has permitted you . Undoubtedly , Allah loves those who repent excessively , and He loves those who keep themselves thoroughly pure and clean .
Your wives are for you like a harvest producing field . So , go to your field as you may desire . And manage some provisions for yourselves for the next world . Inculcate in yourselves Allahs fear and be mindful that you have to appear before Him . And , ( O Beloved , ) give good news to the believers ( that their appearance before Allah will be gainful for them ) .
And because of your oaths , do not use ( the Name of ) Allah as an excuse for refraining from doing good ( to the people ) , becoming God - fearing and making peace among people . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Allah will not hold you accountable for your vain oaths but will take you to task for the oaths taken with serious intention in your hearts . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Forbearing .
And for those who swear not to go near their wives , there is a ( reconsideration ) period of four months . So , if ( during this period ) they resume their relations , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
But if they resolve firmly to divorce , then certainly Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And the divorced women shall hold back themselves till three menstrual cycles . And it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah may have created in their wombs , if they believe in Allah and the Last Day . And during this period , their husbands have a greater right to take them back ( again ) into conjugal bond , provided they intend to reconcile .
And , according to usage , women too have rights over men similar to the rights of men over women .
Men , however , have an advantage over them . And Allah is All - Mighty , Most Wise .
Divorce is ( revocable ) two times ( only ) . Then either retain ( the wife ) with honour ( in marital relationship ) or release her with kindness . And it is not lawful for you to take back anything of that which you have given them , unless both fear that ( now by maintaining marital ties ) they may not be able to observe the limits set by Allah .
So if you fear that both will be unable to keep within Allahs limits , then ( in that case ) there shall be no sin upon either of them if the wife ( herself ) may give up something as recompense to free herself ( from this distressing bond ) .
These are the limits ( set ) by Allah . So , do not exceed them . And those who exceed the limits prescribed by Allah , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
Then if he divorces ( for the third time ) , she will not be lawful for him until she marries some husband other than him .
But if he ( the latter ) also divorces her , in such case there shall be no sin on both of them ( the former husband and the wife ) if they return ( once more to the wedlock ) , provided both of them ( now ) think that they would be able to observe the limits set by Allah .
These are the limits ( prescribed ) by Allah which He explains to those who have knowledge .
And when you divorce the women and they reach ( the completion of ) their waiting period , then either retain them ( in marital bond ) in a graceful manner or release them nicely .
But do not retain them to hurt so that you subject ( them ) to excesses .
And he who does so wrongs his own soul .
And do not make fun of Allahs Commands .
And call to mind Allahs favour that has been ( bestowed ) upon you and the Book that He has sent down to you and ( the pearls of ) wisdom ( on which He has enlightened you ) .
He advises you ( by means of this code of conduct ) .
And fear Allah and bear in mind that Allah is indeed All - Knowing .
And when you divorce the women and they reach ( the completion of ) their waiting period , then do not prevent them from remarrying ( their former or latter ) husbands when they have mutually agreed according to the Islamic Law . This is a direction for him among you who believes in Allah and the Last Day . It is most pure , clean and wholesome for you . And Allah knows and you do not know ( so many things ) .
And the mothers shall suckle their infants for two full years . This ( injunction ) is for him who wants to complete the suckling period .
According to usage , the food and clothing of the feeding mothers is the obligation of the father of the child .
No soul should be stressed beyond its capacity ( and ) neither the mother nor the father should be harmed for the child .
The same injunction is applicable to the heirs .
Then if the mother and the father both desire with mutual consultation and consent to wean ( even before the fixed two years ) there will be no sin on them .
Nor shall it be a sin if you intend to engage ( a wet nurse ) for suckling the child , while you pay them whatever you do according to usage .
And fear Allah and know that Allah is watchful of all that you do .
And those of you who die and leave ( their ) widows behind shall keep themselves in waiting for four months and ten days . So , when they arrive at ( the end of ) their waiting term , there shall be no responsibility on you for whatever they do for themselves according to Islamic Law . And Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
And there is no sin on you if ( even during the waiting term ) you convey to such women a hint of marriage proposal or conceal ( this idea ) in your hearts . Allah knows that you will soon mention to them but do not seek from them any ( such ) promise even secretly , except that you say to them ( a hint of ) that according to Islamic Law . And do not resolve firmly on wedlock ( during this time ) until the prescribed waiting term is over . And know that Allah also knows what is in your hearts . So fear Him persistently . And ( also ) know that Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Lenient .
There will ( also ) be no sin on you if you divorce ( the wedlocked ) women even before touching them or fixing their dower . Then ( in this case ) provide for them appropriately . It is ( an obligation ) for the rich according to his means and for the poor according to his means . ( In any case ) this provision must be made in a becoming manner . This is compulsory for the pious .
And if you divorce them before you have touched them after you have fixed a dower for them , then paying half of the dower you have fixed is necessary , unless they forgo ( their right ) themselves , or the ( husband ) in whose hand is the marriage tie forgoes ( i . e . pays more than half or full ) . And , ( O male folk , ) if you forgo , that is closer to God - wariness . And never forget extending generosity ( and behaving excellently ) towards each other ( even in these moments of stress and strain ) . Verily , Allah observes well what you do .
Guard strictly all the Prayers , especially the middle prayer . And stand before Allah as an epitome of submissiveness and lowliness .
Should you be in a state of fear , then ( do offer Prayer ) whether on foot or while riding ( as the case may be ) , but once you get back to peace , remember Allah in the manner He has taught you which you did not know ( before ) .
And those of you who die and leave ( their ) widows behind must leave a will for their widows ( before they die ) to provide them for their maintenance for one year ( and ) not to turn them out of their houses .
But if they themselves walk out ( on their own ) then there is no sin on you for whatever they may do for themselves according to usage . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And the divorced women must also be provided with maintenance according to what is fair . This is compulsory for the pious .
Thus Allah makes His Commandments clear to you so that you may understand .
( O Beloved ! ) Have you not seen the people who went out of their houses fearing death though they were in thousands ? Allah commanded them : Die , ( and they died ) . Then He restored them to life . Surely Allah is Most Bountiful towards mankind , but most of them do not give ( Him ) thanks .
And , ( O Muslims , ) fight in the way of Allah and know that Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Who is he that will lend to Allah a generous loan ? He will , then , multiply it for him manifold . And Allah it is Who decreases and increases ( your sustenance ) and towards Him will you be returned .
( O Beloved ! ) Have you not seen the group of the Children of Israel who came after Musa ( Moses ) ?
When they said to their Prophet : Appoint for us a king so that we may fight in the cause of Allah ( under his command ) ,
the Prophet said ( to them ) : What , if you desist from fighting once it is prescribed for you !
They said : What ails us that we should not fight in the cause of Allah when we have been driven away from our homes and children ?
But when fighting was made obligatory for them , all of them turned away , except a few .
And Allah knows the wrongdoers full well .
And their Prophet said to them : Allah has appointed for you Talut ( Saul ) as a king .
They said : How can he reign over us whereas we have greater right than him to rule , and he has also not been granted affluence .
( The Prophet ) said : Surely Allah has chosen him above you , and has given him more affluent knowledge and vigour ;
and Allah ( entrusts ) with His kingdom whom He pleases and Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
And their Prophet said to them : The sign of his kingdom ( to be Allahs bestowal ) is that a box , carried by angels , shall come to you from your Lord , containing things for tranquillity of heart , and some sacred relics left behind by children of Musa and Harun ( Moses and Aaron ) . Surely there is in it a great sign for you if you are believers .
So , when Talut ( Saul ) marched out of the city with his troops , he said : Surely , Allah will try you by means of a stream . So he who drinks from it will not be ( of my companions ) , and he who does not drink it will be of ( my party ) , but if someone takes ( only ) a sip of it from the hollow of his hand , ( there is no harm ) .
Yet , they all drank of it except a few .
So , when Talut ( Saul ) and his companions in faith crossed the stream they said : We have no strength today to face Jalut ( Goliath ) and his forces .
( But ) those who were sure that ( after martyrdom or death ) they were going to meet Allah said : Many a time a small party has overcome a ( very ) large party by the Command of Allah ! And Allah awards His companionship to the steadfast .
And when they faced Jalut ( Goliath ) and his forces , they supplicated Allah : O our Lord , grant us plentiful patience and make our steps firm and give us victory over the disbelievers .
So they defeated them ( the army of Jalut [ Goliath ] ) by Allahs Command and Dawud ( David ) killed Jalut . And Allah granted ( Dawud ) sovereignty and wisdom and taught him what He wished . If Allah had not removed one group by means of another , ( the human life on ) earth would have been ruined ( due to persistent suppression and oppression by tyrants ) . But Allah is Bountiful to all the worlds .
These are Allahs Verses . ( O Beloved ! ) We recite them to you with the Truth and indeed you are of the Messengers .
Of all these Messengers ( whom We sent ) We have exalted some above others : Allah spoke to some of them ( directly ) , and raised some ( above all others ) in rank ( i . e . elevated the Holy Prophet [ Allah bless him and give him peace ] to the highest of all the degrees of the glory of Messengership ) . And We gave Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , clear Signs and helped him with the Holy Spirit .
And had Allah so willed , the people succeeding these Messengers would never have disputed and fought among themselves , after the manifest Signs had come to them . But they differed ( owing to the free will which was endowed to them to be answerable before Allah for their performance ) . So , some of them believed while others opted to disbelieve .
( And keep it in mind that ) if Allah had willed ( i . e . restricted their choice to one opinion only ) they would never have fought among themselves . But Allah does what He desires .
O Believers ! Spend ( in the cause of Allah ) out of whatever We have provided for you , before the Day comes when there will be no trading ; and ( for disbelievers ) neither any friendship ( will be useful ) nor ( any ) intercession ; and it is the disbelievers who are the transgressors .
Allah ! None is worthy of worship but He , the Ever - Living , the Self - Subsisting , the One Who sustains and protects ( the entire universe with His Strategy ) . He is seized by neither slumber nor sleep . Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth belongs to Him alone . Who can dare intercede with Him except by His permission ? ( He ) knows all that is ( happening or has happened ) before the Creation and all that is ( about to happen ) after them ; and they cannot encompass anything of His knowledge except that which He wills . His Throne ( of Empire and Power and Authority ) encompasses the heavens and the earth , and the protection of both ( the earth and the heavens ) does not pose Him any difficulty . He alone is Most High , Most Great .
There is no compulsion in Din ( Religion ) . Surely the guidance has been evidently distinguished from error . So he who rejects false gods and believes in Allah has grasped such a firm handhold that will never ( possibly ) give way . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Allah is the Guardian of the believers . He brings them out of ( all kinds of ) darkness and takes them towards the light . And those who are disbelievers , their supporters are satans who take them out of the light ( of Truth ) into the darkness ( of evil ) . It is they who are the inmates of Hell . They will stay there forever .
( O Beloved ! ) Have you not seen him who began to dispute with Ibrahim ( Abraham ) about his own Lord because Allah had given him kingdom ? When Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : My Lord is He Who gives life and ( also ) causes death , ( the king ) said ( in reply ) : I ( too ) give life and cause death . Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : Surely , Allah causes the sun to rise in the east ; bring it up from the west . So , the infidel was stunned . And Allah does not guide the transgressors to the right path .
Or , likewise , ( have you not seen ) him who passed by a town which was a wreck with its roofs caved in ? He said : How shall Allah bring it back to life after its death ? So ( to make him witness His Power ) Allah kept him dead for a hundred years , then gave him life , ( and after that ) asked : How long ( have ) you stayed here ( after dying ) ?
He said : I stayed for a day or ( only ) part of a day . Allah said : ( Nay , ) you kept lying for a hundred years . So , ( now ) look at ( the provisions of ) your food and drink . ( They ) have not even decomposed ( i . e . become stale ) . And ( now ) see your donkey ( whose very bones are no more intact ) .
And this is because We may make you a Sign ( of Our Might ) for the people . And ( now ) see ( these ) bones how We stir ( and raise ) them and clothe them with flesh . When this ( phenomenon ) fully dawned on him , he proclaimed : I have learnt ( through the eye of certitude ) that Allah is indeed All - Powerful to do everything .
And ( also recall the event ) when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : My Lord , show me how You bring the dead to life . Allah said : Do you not have faith ? He submitted : Why not ! ( I do believe , ) but ( I wish ) my heart is blessed with gratifying calm . Allah ordained : Well , take four birds and tame them to feel attached to you ; then ( slaughter them and ) place a piece of each of them on each hill ; then call them . They will come to you at high speed . And know that surely Allah is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
The example of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah is like ( that ) grain out of which seven ears shoot forth . ( And then ) each ear bears a hundred grains ( i . e . they are rewarded seven hundred times ) . And Allah multiplies ( still more ) for whom He likes . And Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
Those who spend their wealth in the cause of Allah , and then do not follow up their spending by reminding of their benevolence or by hurting , there is reward for them with their Lord . And ( on the Day of Resurrection ) they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
Polite conversation ( with the needy ) and extending tolerance are far better than charity followed by injuring ( his ) heart . And Allah is Self - Sufficient , Forbearing .
O Believers ! Do not ruin your charity donations ( later ) by taunts of doing favour and hurting feelings like the one who gives charity to show off his wealth to the people and believes in neither Allah nor the Last Day . His case is like a smooth rock covered with a thin coat of soil . Then heavy rain falls on it , washes it clean and leaves it ( the same ) bare and hard ( rock ) . So these ( pretentious people ) shall get nothing out of their earning . And Allah does not guide the disbelievers .
And those who spend their wealth to seek Allahs pleasure and stabilize themselves ( in faith and obedience ) are like a garden located on a higher ground level . When a heavy rain falls on it , it doubles its yield . And if it does not receive a heavy rain then even dew ( or drizzle ) is sufficient . And Allah monitors your actions minutely .
Would anyone of you like to have a garden of date - palms and grapevines with streams flowing beneath it and all kinds of fruit ( in addition to dates and grapes ) ; and ( under these conditions ) old age overtakes him while his children are ( still ) tender ; and ( in the meanwhile ) the garden is struck with a whirlwind composed ( entirely ) of fire and gets burnt ? ( Imagine the state of his helplessness , agony and anxiety . ) Thus Allah makes clear His Signs for you so that you may reflect . ( So , do you wish that the orchard of your deeds should also burn to ashes in the fire of pretentiousness on the Last Day and there should be none to support you ? )
O Believers ! Spend ( in the way of Allah ) of your lawful and clean earnings and of that which We bring forth for you from the earth . And do not intend to spend ( in the cause of Allah ) from that which is unclean , for ( if the same is given to you ) you yourself would never accept it without closing your eyes to it . And you mustknow that Allah is certainly All - Sufficient , Worthy of All Praise .
Satan makes you afraid of poverty ( to stop you from spending in the way of Allah ) and enjoins you to commit indecency . And Allah promises you His forgiveness and bounty . And Allah is All - Embracing , All - Knowing .
He blesses with wisdom whom He wills . And he who is granted wisdom ( and reason ) receives tremendous good . And only those who are endowed with wisdom and insight receive direction and guidance .
And whatever you spend or whatever you vow to offer , Allah verily knows it and the evildoers have no helpers .
If you give charity in public , it is worthwhile ( for it will persuade others ) , but if you hide and deliver it to the poor in secret that is ( far ) better for you . And Allah will remove from you some of your sins ( due to this charity ) . And Allah is Aware of all that you do .
Their ( acceptance ) of guidance is not your responsibility . It is Allah Who awards guidance whom He wills . And whatever wealth you give away ( as charity donation ) goes to your own benefit . It is not appropriate for you to spend but for Allahs pleasure alone . And whatever you spend of your wealth , ( its reward ) will be paid back to you in full and you shall not be treated unjustly .
( Charity is ) the right of those poor who have been restricted ( from earning their livelihood ) in the cause of Allah . They cannot even move about in the land ( due to their whole time involvement in matters of Din [ Religion ] ) . Because of their ( ascetic ) aversion to greed , the unwise ( knowing little about their state of heart and soul ) consider them wealthy . You will recognize them from their appearance . They do not ask people ( for help ) at all lest they should humble themselves ( before them ) . And whatever wealth you give in charity , Allah indeed knows it well .
Those who spend ( in the cause of Allah ) privately or publicly , by night and day , have their reward with their Lord . And ( on the Day of Resurrection ) they shall neither fear nor grieve .
Those who live on usury will not be able to stand ( on the Day of Judgment ) but like the one whom Satan has made insane with his touch ( damnation ) . This is because they used to say that trade ( buying and selling ) is similar to usury whereas Allah has declared trading ( buying and selling ) lawful and usury unlawful . So , if someone refrained ( from usury ) on receiving admonition from his Lord , then he can keep whatever he took in the past and his case is with Allah . But those who continued with usury ( despite the admonition ) would be the inmates of Hell . There will they stay permanently .
Allah eliminates usury ( i . e . deprives usurious profits of prosperous growth ) and multiplies alms gifts ( i . e . increases blessings of clean wealth manifold through charity donations ) . And Allah does not like anyone who is ungrateful and disobedient .
Surely those who believe and do pious acts and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly have their reward with their Lord . And ( on the Last Day ) they will neither fear nor grieve .
O Believers ! Fear Allah and write off whatever balance remains of usury if you are believers ( true to the core of your hearts ) .
But if you do not do so , then stand red - alert on the declaration of war from Allah and His Holy Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . And if you repent , then your principal amounts are ( lawfully ) yours . Do not wrong and be not wronged .
If a debtor is under financial stress , he should be given respite till he feels at ease to pay . And your forgoing ( the loan ) is better for you if you know ( what significance it has in the sight of Allah to console the poor ) .
And fear the Day when you will be returned to Allah . Then everyone will be paid in full for whatever he has done and they will not be wronged .
O Believers ! Whenever you strike deals with one another for a fixed period , reduce the transaction to writing .
And the scribe amongst you should write it with justice and should not refuse to write as Allah has taught him to write .
So he should write ( i . e . he should meet the requirements of documentation with utmost honesty , in accordance with the law of the land ) .
And he on whom the liability ( i . e . debt ) falls should dictate the contents of the contract .
And he should fear Allah , Who is his Sustainer , and ( while writing ) he should not diminish anything ( from the indebted sum ) .
Then if he who has undertaken the liability is mentally deficient or physically weak or lacks the ability to dictate the contents , his guardian should dictate with fairness .
And get two witnesses out of your own men . But if two men are not available then a man and two women : ( they ) should be from among those whom you like as witnesses ( i . e . consider trustworthy ) , so that if either of the two women forgets , the other may remind her .
And the witnesses should not refuse whenever they are called ( for evidence ) . And do not be weary of writing it down for its term whether the transaction is small or large .
This documentation by you is more just in the sight of Allah , and makes evidence more solid and nearer to keeping you from doubt , except that if transactions are hand - to - hand which you carry out among yourselves then there is no sin on you if you do not write it down .
And take witnesses whenever you bargain among yourselves .
And let no harm be done to either the scribe or the witness , but if you do so , it will be sheer disobedience on your part .
And keep fearing Allah . And Allah grants you knowledge of ( principles of mutual dealing ) and Allah knows everything well .
And if you are on a journey and do not find a scribe , then take possession of a pledge in mortgage . Then , if one of you trusts the other , so he whose honesty has been trusted should deliver his trust and fear Allah Who provides him subsistence . And do not conceal evidence . And the one who conceals it , his heart is certainly sinful . And Allah knows well whatever you do .
Whatever exists in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah . Whether you reveal or conceal the secrets of your heart , Allah will call you to account for that . Then Allah shall forgive whom He desires and torment whom He desires . And Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
( He ) the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) believed in ( i . e . affirmed ) what was revealed to him by his Lord and so did the believers . All embraced faith ( from the core of their hearts ) in Allah , His angels , His Books and His Messengers . ( They also say : ) We do not differentiate between any of His Messengers ( in believing ) . And they submit ( before His Holy Presence ) : We have heard ( Your Command ) and ( accepted to ) obey . O our Lord ! We seek Your forgiveness and to You ( we all ) have to return .
Allah does not put under stress any soul more than its endurance . There is a reward for whatever good it has earned and there is torment for whatever evil it has perpetrated . O our Lord , do not take us to task if we forget or do some mistake . O our Lord , lay not on us such a ( heavy ) burden as You laid on those before us . O our Lord , put not on us ( also ) the burden that we have not the strength to bear , and overlook ( our sins ) , and forgive us and have mercy on us . You alone are our Master and Helper . So grant us victory over the disbelievers .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
Allah ! None is worthy of worship but He , the Ever - Living , Self - Subsisting and Sustainer ( of the entire universe with His Strategy ) .
( O Beloved ! ) He is the One Who has revealed to you ( this ) Book with Truth . ( It ) confirms ( all those Books ) that were revealed before it . And He is the One Who has revealed the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) .
( As the Books were revealed ) before this to guide the people , He has ( now , in like manner , ) revealed ( the Quran , ) the Criterion to distinguish right from wrong . Verily those who deny Allahs Revelations for them is rigorous punishment . And Allah is Almighty , the Lord of Retribution .
Surely , nothing is hidden from Allah in the earth or in the heaven .
He is the One Who shapes your forms the way He desires in the wombs ( of mothers ) . None is worthy of worship but He . He is Almighty , All - Wise .
He is the One Who has revealed to you the Book comprising some firm and solid Verses ( i . e . literally clear and precise in meaning ) ; they are the foundation of ( commandments ) of the Book . And other Verses are figurative ( i . e . containing abstract and allusive meaning ) . So , those who have deviation in their hearts follow only its figurative Verses ( just ) under the urge to create disruption and with the motive to supply them self - seeking interpretation instead of their true interpretation . But none knows its true interpretation apart from Allah . And those who are perfectly firm in knowledge say : We believe in it . The whole ( Book ) has been revealed by our Lord . And direction and guidance is the share of only those who possess wisdom and insight .
( And they submit : ) O our Lord , let not our hearts deviate after You have honoured us with guidance and grant us Mercy especially from Your Presence . Truly You alone are the Great Bestower .
O Our Lord ! You will surely bring together mankind on the Day about which there is no doubt . Verily , Allah does not go against ( His ) promise .
Indeed those who reject faith , neither their wealth nor their children shall be able to save them anyway from ( the torment of ) Allah . It is they who are the fuel of Hell .
( Their ) line of action ( also ) resembles that of the people of Pharaoh and those before them who belied Our Revelations . So , Allah seized them because of their sins and Allah gives severe punishment .
Say to the disbelievers : You will soon be overpowered and driven towards Hell , and that is a very evil abode .
There is certainly a sign for you in the two parties that encountered each other ( in the battlefield of Badr ) one party fought in the cause of Allah and the other comprised the disbelievers . They saw them with their ( own ) eyes as twice their own number . And Allah provides strength with His reinforcement whom He likes . In this incident there is surely a ( notable ) lesson of warning for those who have eyes .
( Excessively ) attractive has been made , for the people , the love of lusts ( that ) include women , children , and hoarded treasures of gold and silver , and branded horses and cattle and crops . ( All ) this is the provision of the worldly life and with Allah is the best abode .
( O Beloved ! ) Say : Shall I give you the news of something far better than all this ? ( Yes , ) for the Godfearing there are ( such ) gardens with their Lord beneath which streams flow . They will live there forever . There will be ( for them ) chaste wives , and ( above all ) they shall enjoy the pleasure of Allah . And Allah monitors His servants well .
( These are the people ) who say : O our Lord , we have surely believed , so , forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of Hell .
( They are ) steadfast ( people ) , truthful in their words and deeds and submissive in devotion and obedience . And they spend in the way of Allah , and ( rise ) in the later hours of the night to implore Allahs pardon .
Allah bears witness that none is worthy of worship apart from Him ; and the angels and those who possess knowledge also bear testimony to it ( as well as the fact ) that He designs and executes every plan with justice . None is worthy of worship but He . He is Almighty , All - Wise .
Truly , Islam is the only Din ( Religion ) in Allahs sight . And the people of the Book disagreed , after knowledge had come to them , only on account of their mutual jealousy and contention . And he who denies Allahs revelations , then surely Allah hastens in calling to account .
( O Beloved ! ) If they , even then , have a row with you , say to them : I have bowed my humble face in absolute submissiveness before the Presence of Allah and so have done those who follow me . And say to the people of the Book as well as the illiterate ones : Do you also bow before Allah ( i . e . do you accept Islam ) ? Then if they embrace submission then they have truly achieved guidance . But if they turn away , your responsibility is only to deliver the command . And Allah is Watchful of His servants .
Certainly those who deny Revelations of Allah and kill the Prophets unjustly , and also kill those of the people who enjoin equity and justice , so announce to them the news of a grievous torment .
They are the ones whose works have become void both in this world and in the Hereafter . And they shall have no helpers .
Have you not seen those who were given a portion of ( the knowledge of ) the Book ? They are invited towards the Book of Allah , so that it ( the Book ) gives judgment ( on disputes ) among them . Then , a party of them turn away and it is they who deviate .
This ( courage to deviate ) is because they say : The Fire of Hell will not touch us except for a few numbered days . And the lies that they invent ( about Allah ) have deluded them with regard to their Din ( Religion ) .
So , what will be their plight when We shall assemble all of them together on the Day in ( the happening of ) which there is no doubt and everyone will be paid back in full for whatever ( deeds ) he has earned , and no injustice will be done to them .
( O My Beloved ! ) Submit ( like this ) : O Allah , Lord of Sovereignty ! You bestow sovereignty on whom You will and You take away sovereignty from whom You will . You confer honour on whom You will and You dishonour whom You will . All good is in Your Mighty Hand and surely You have Absolute Authority and Control over everything .
You make the night enter into the day and You make the day enter into the night and You bring the living out of the dead and You bring the dead out of the living and You bless ( with Your Bounties ) without measure whom You wish .
The Muslims should not make friends with disbelievers instead of Muslims . And whoever does so will have nothing of ( the alliance with ) Allah except that you seek protection ( from their mischief ) . And Allah warns you to fear ( the wrath ) of His Divine Essence and to Allah is the return .
Say : Whether you hide what is in your breasts or make it known , Allah knows it and He thoroughly knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth . And Allah has Mighty Control over everything .
On the Day when every soul shall find present ( before him ) every good that he accomplished and every evil that he perpetrated , he will wish there were a great distance between him and that evil ( or that Day ) . Allah warns you to fear ( the wrath ) of His Divine Essence and Allah is Most Compassionate towards His servants .
( O Beloved ! ) Say : If you love Allah , follow me . Allah will then take you as ( His ) beloved and forgive your sins for you , and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Say : Obey Allah and the Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) . But if they turn away then Allah does not like the disbelievers .
Verily , Allah chose Adam , and Nuh ( Noah ) , and the family of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and the family of Imran ( in dignity ) above all the people of the world .
They are all one race , descendants of one another . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And ( recall ) when the wife of Imran said : O my Lord , I vow purely to You what is in my womb , freeing him ( from other obligations ) . So , accept ( this offering ) from me . You are indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
So when she delivered a baby girl , she submitted : Lord , I have given birth but to a female child . But Allah knew best what she had given birth to . ( She said : ) And the boy ( that I prayed for ) could never ( be ) like the girl ( that Allah has blessed me with ) ; and I have named her Maryam ( Mary , the worshipper ) ; and surely I commit her and her children to Your protection against ( the mischief of ) Satan , the outcast .
So , her Lord graciously accepted her ( Maryam [ Mary ] ) with excellent acceptance and brought her up immaculately and entrusted her guardianship to Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) . Every time Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) entered her chamber of worship he found with her ( novel and uncommon ) food items . He inquired : O Maryam , wherefrom have these things come for you ? She replied : This ( sustenance ) comes from Allah . Verily , Allah provides sustenance without measure to whom He desires .
At the same place Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) supplicated his Lord . He submitted : O my Lord , bless me , out of Your Grace , with a virtuous and pure offspring . Surely You alone hear the supplication .
While he was still standing in the chamber offering the Prayer ( or supplicating ) , the angels called out to him : Indeed , Allah gives you the good news of ( a son ) Yahya ( John ) , who shall confirm the Word from Allah ( i . e . Isa [ Jesus ] ) and he will be a leader , well - protected against ( temptation for ) women and a Prophet from among ( Our ) exceptionally pious servants .
( Zakariyya ) submitted : O my Lord , how shall I have a son when old age has already overtaken me and my wife is ( also ) barren ? He said : The same way as Allah does whatever He wills .
Zakariyya submitted : O my Lord , fix a sign for me . Allah said : The sign for you is that for three days you will not be able to communicate to the people except by gestures . And remember your Lord excessively and glorify Him persistently evening and morning .
And when the angels said : O Maryam ( Mary ) , surely Allah has chosen you and has blessed you with purity and has exalted you today over all the women of the world .
O Maryam ( Mary ) ! Obey your Lord consistently with utmost humbleness , prostrate yourself and bow down in worship along with those who bow down .
( O Beloved ! ) These are news of the Unseen which We reveal to you . But ( at that time ) you were not present with them when they were casting their pens ( by way of a draw to determine ) which of them should take care of Maryam ( Mary ) . Nor were you with them when they were disputing with one another .
When the angels said : O Maryam ( Mary ) , surely , Allah gives you glad tidings of a ( particular ) Word from Him named the Messiah , Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , who would be eminent and exalted ( both ) in this world and in the Hereafter and would be of those who are exceptionally intimate servants of Allah blessed with His nearness .
And he will talk to the people ( alike ) both in the cradle and in ripe years , and he will be one of the pious servants ( of Allah ) .
Maryam ( Mary ) submitted : O my Lord , how shall I have a son when no man has ever touched me ? He said : Just as Allah creates what He pleases . When He decides ( to do ) some work , He just gives it the Command Be , and it becomes .
And Allah will teach him the Book and the Wisdom , the Torah and the Injil ( [ the Gospel ] everything ) .
And he will be a Messenger to the Children of Israel , ( saying to them : ) I have undoubtedly brought to you a Sign from your Lord : I design for you from clay ( a figure ) like the shape of a bird ; then I breathe into it ; and at once it becomes a flying bird by Allahs Command . And I restore to health the born blind , and the lepers , and raise the dead to life by the Command of Allah . And I inform you of ( all ) what you have eaten and what you have hoarded in your houses . Truly , there is a Sign in it for you if you believe .
And I validate the ( Book ) Torah sent down before me , and that is because I may declare certain things lawful for you which were forbidden to you as unlawful . And I have come to you from your Lord with a Sign . So , fear Allah and obey me .
Verily , Allah is my Lord and your Lord too . So worship Him alone . This is the straight path .
Later , when Isa ( Jesus ) sensed their disbelief , he said : Who are my helpers in the way of Allah ? His sincere companions submitted : We are the helpers of ( Din [ the religion ] of ) Allah . We have believed in Allah and bear witness that we are surely Muslims .
O our Lord ! We have believed in the Book which You have sent down and we have become the followers of this Messenger . So register us among those who bear witness ( to the Truth ) .
Then , the disbelieving ( Jews ) conspired secretly ( to execute Isa [ Jesus ] ) but Allah covertly designed His plan ( to safeguard Isa [ Jesus ] ) . And Allah is the Best of secret planners .
When Allah said : O Isa ( Jesus ) , I will surely bring your term of life to completion ; and I am about to lift you towards Myself ( in the heavens ) , and deliver you from the disbelievers , and exalt your followers above ( these ) disbelievers till the Day of Resurrection . Then to Me you all have to return . So I shall judge between you in the matters about which you used to dispute .
As for those who disbelieved , I shall give them severe punishment ( both ) in this world and in the Hereafter , and they shall have no helpers .
And those who believed and did pious deeds , ( Allah ) shall reward them in full . And Allah does not like the wrongdoers .
These which We read out to you are Signs and the wisdom - laden advice .
Surely the example of Isa ( Jesus ) in the sight of Allah is the same as that of Adam whom He formed from clay , then said ( to him ) : Be . He became .
( Ordained to forewarn the Umma [ the Community ] : ) This is the Truth from your Lord , so be not of those who doubt .
So , if someone contends with you about Isa ( Jesus ) after knowledge has come to you , say : Come , let us ( jointly ) call our sons and your sons , our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves ( at the same place ) . Then we supplicate fervently ( i . e . most submissively ) and invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars .
Most certainly , this is the true narrative and there is none worthy of worship except Allah . And verily Allah it is Who is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
But if they turn away , then surely Allah knows the miscreants full well .
Say : O People of the Book , come to that matter which is common between us and you ( namely that ) : we shall worship none other than Allah , and we shall not associate any partner with Him . Nor shall anyone of us take one another as Lords apart from Allah . Then if they turn away , say : Bear witness that we are but Allahs obedient servants ( Muslims ) .
O People of the Book ! Why do you dispute about Ibrahim ( [ Abraham ] i . e . why do you regard him as a Jew or a Christian ] ) ? The truth is that the Torah and the Injil ( [ the Gospel ] on which both your religions are based ) were sent down after his time . Have you not even ( this much ) sense ?
Listen ! You are the people who have also been disputing about matters of which you had ( but some ) knowledge . But why do you dispute about things of which you have no knowledge ( at all ) ? And Allah knows but you do not know .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) was neither a Jew nor a Christian ; he was a ( true ) Muslim , far detached from all heresy and falsehood . Nor was he one of the polytheists .
Certainly the nearest of the people to Ibrahim , ( and the most deserving ) are those who have followed him ( in his Din [ Religion ] ) . And ( they ) are no other than this Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and those who have believed ( in him ) . And Allah is the Helper of the believers .
( O Muslims ! ) A section of the People of the Book ( intensely ) desire to , somehow , lead you astray but they have led astray only themselves while they have no sense ( of it ) .
O People of the Book ! Why are you denying Allahs Revelations while you bear witness yourselves ( i . e . you have read everything in your Books ) ?
O People of the Book ! Why do you confound the Truth with falsehood and why do you hide the Truth whereas you know ?
And a section of the People of the Book say ( to the people ) : Believe in the Book ( Quran ) which is sent down to Muslims at dawn ( in the morning ) and deny it in the evening , so that , ( imitating you , ) they may also desert and turn about .
And do not believe anyone but him who follows ( only ) your Din ( Religion ) . Say : Surely , the guidance is but the guidance of Allah ( alone ) . ( And they further say to their people never to believe even this ) that : The like of the Book ( or Din ) given to you may also be given to anyone else or that someone may give a plea against you before your Lord . Say : Bounty is in the Hand of Allah . He bestows on whom He pleases and Allah is All - Embracing , All - Knowing .
He specifies to His Mercy whom He desires and Allah is the Lord of Infinite Bounty .
And among the People of the Book there are a type that if you trust him with a heap of wealth , he will return it to you . And some among them are such that if you trust him with one dinar ( a gold coin ) , he will not return it to you unless you keep standing over him . That is because they say : There is no blame on us in the matter of the illiterate . And they fabricate a lie against Allah and they know it themselves ( as well ) .
Yes , he who fulfils his promise and adopts God - fearingness ( will indeed face no accountability ) ; so Allah surely loves the pious .
Certainly those who sell the promise of Allah and their own oaths for a small price , it is they who will not have any share in the Hereafter . And on the Day of Resurrection Allah will neither speak to nor look at them and nor will He purify them , and for them will be painful punishment .
And there is indeed another section of them who , while reciting the Book , twist their tongues so that you may take their inverted expressions as ( part of ) the Book whereas it is not from the Book . And they say : It is ( all ) from Allah , while it is not ( at all ) from Allah . They invent a lie against Allah and they know ( it ) themselves as well .
No human being whom Allah blesses with the Book and Wisdom and Prophethood has the right to say to the people : Be my servants instead of Allahs . ( He would rather say : ) Be the devotees of Allah because you teach the Book and because you study it yourselves as well .
And nor would that Messenger ever command you to take the angels and the Prophets as Lords . Would he command you ( now ) to disbelieve after you have become Muslims ?
And , ( O Beloved , recall the time ) when Allah took a firm covenant from the Prophets : When I give you the Book and Wisdom and then there comes to you the Messenger ( who is exalted in glory above all and ) who shall validate the Books you will have with you , you shall then , most certainly , believe in him and most surely help him . Allah said : Do you affirm , and on this ( condition ) hold fast to My heavy Covenant ? All submitted : We affirm . Allah said : Bear witness then and I am also with you among the witnesses .
( Now admonished all mankind : ) Then he who turns away after this ( affirmation ) , it is they who will be the disobedient .
Do they seek some Din ( Religion ) other than Allahs ? And whoever is in the heavens and the earth has embraced His obedience ( whether ) by choice or by constraint , and to Him shall they all be returned .
Say : We believe in Allah and in that which has been sent down to us and in that which has been revealed to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ismail ( Ishmael ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob ) and their descendants and that which has been given to Musa ( Moses ) , Isa ( Jesus ) and all other Messengers by their Lord ( we believe in all ) . We do not make distinction in our faith in anyone of them and to Him we submit ourselves .
And whoever seeks a Din ( Religion ) other than Islam that shall not at all be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the Hereafter .
How shall Allah guide those who disbelieved after embracing faith while they had borne witness that this Messenger is true , and clear Signs too had come to them ? And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
The punishment of such people is that they are continually plagued by the curse of Allah , of the angels and of all mankind .
They shall remain ( imprisoned ) under this curse forever . And neither will this torment be lessened nor shall they be given respite .
Except those who repent and mend ( their ) ways . Allah is , indeed , Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Assuredly , the people who disbelieve after accepting belief and then advance in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted at all , and it is they who have lost the right path .
Surely those who disbelieved and died while they were disbelievers , if anyone of them offers an earthful of gold as ransom ( for his salvation ) that shall not at all be accepted from him . It is they for whom there is painful torment . And no helper will be possible for them .
You can never attain to piety unless you spend ( in the cause of Allah ) out of that which you like the most ; and Allah surely knows well whatever you give away .
Before the revelation of the Torah , everything edible was lawful for the Children of Israel except those ( things ) which Yaqub ( Jacob ) had declared forbidden for himself . Say : Bring the Torah and read it out if you are truthful .
So , whoever fabricates a lie against Allah even after this , then it is they who are the wrongdoers .
Say : Allah has proclaimed the Truth , so follow the Din ( Religion ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) who , rejecting every evil , devoted himself wholly to Allah . And he was not one of the polytheists .
The first House ever constructed for mankind ( to worship ) is indeed the one in Makka teeming with blessings and ( the centre of ) guidance for the whole world .
There are manifest Signs in it , ( one of which is ) the station of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) . Whoever enters it attains safety and protection ; and the Pilgrimage to this House is prescribed for the people for the sake of Allah whoever may afford its journey ; and whoever denies ( it ) then indeed , Allah is Self - Sufficient , Beyond Need of all the worlds .
Say : O People of the Book , why do you deny the Revelations of Allah ? And Allah is observing your actions .
Say : O People of the Book , why do you hinder him from Allahs path who has embraced faith ? You want to make their path crooked too while you are yourselves a witness ( that it is straight ) . And Allah is not unaware of your doings .
O Believers ! If you obey any section of the People of the Book , they will turn you back to disbelief after you have ( embraced ) faith .
And how will you disbelieve ( now ) while you are ( fortunate ) ones to whom the Verses of Allah are recited , and the Messenger of Allah ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is ( himself ) present among you ? And whoever holds fast to ( the Embrace of ) Allah is most surely guided to the straight path .
O Believers ! Fear Allah as it is due to fear Him . And death should approach you only in a state when you are Muslim .
And hold fast to the rope of Allah all of you together and do not generate dissension and factions . But call to mind the blessing of Allah upon you when you were enemies ( one to another ) . Then He created the bond of love among your hearts , and by His blessing you became brothers . And you ( had reached ) the brink of a pit of Fire ( of Hell ) but He rescued you from it . That is how Allah elaborates His Signs to you so that you may take guidance to the right path .
And from amongst you there must be a community comprising the people who would invite mankind towards piety , bid righteousness and forbid evil . And they are the successful people .
And become not like those who split into sects and dissented even after manifest Signs had reached them . And it is they who would suffer grievous torment .
On the Day when many faces will be bright and many others will be dark . The ones with dark faces ( will be asked ) : Did you reject faith after you had believed ? So taste the torment for the disbelief you had been committing .
But those with ( glittering ) white faces will be in Allahs Mercy . Therein will they live forever .
These are the Revelations of Allah which We recite to you with Truth . And Allah intends no injustice to mankind .
And whatever exists in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone . And to Allah will all matters be returned .
You are the best community brought forth for ( the guidance of ) mankind : you command righteousness , forbid evil and believe in Allah . Had the People of the Book also embraced faith that would certainly have been in their favour . There are some among them who believe , while the majority of them are disobedient .
They cannot do you any harm beyond offending ; and if they fight you they will turn their backs upon you ; then they will not be helped ( as well ) .
They are shut in humiliation wherever they may be found , except that they are ( provided with shelter ) under some promise with Allah or some bond with people . And they have earned Allahs wrath , and have been subjected to indigence consequent on their rejection of Allahs Revelations and killing the Prophets unjustly , because they turned into rebels and exceeded all limits ( in rebelliousness and defiance ) .
They are not all alike . Some of the People of the Book are ( also ) firmly committed to the Truth . They recite the Verses of Allah during the hours of night and remain in the state of prostration before their Lord .
They believe in Allah and the Last Day and command righteousness , and forbid evil , and advance fast in righteous works . And it is they who are among the pious .
And whatever pious acts they do will not be disregarded ; and Allah is well aware of those who guard against evil .
Certainly those who have disbelieved , neither their riches nor their children will provide them any protection against ( the torment of ) Allah . And they are the ones who are the inmates of Hell and will live there forever .
( Whatever ) wealth ( these people ) spend in the life of this world is like the frost - laden wind which strikes and destroys the harvest of a people who wrong their own souls . And Allah has not done them any wrong but they themselves manage their own wreck .
O Believers ! Do not confide in those who are not from amongst you . They will never miss ( any ) chance to cause you mischief . They wish you severe torture . As for their malice , that has become evident from their utterances , and ( the hostility ) that they have concealed in their hearts is ( even ) greater . We have made the Signs manifest to you , if you would use your intellect .
Beware ! You are the ones who love them but they do not ( even ) like you although you believe in all the Books . When they meet you , they say : We have accepted faith , but when alone , they bite their fingers in rage against you . Say : Perish in your pent - up rage . Certainly Allah knows well the secrets of hearts .
If something goes in your favour , it grieves them ; but if some pain afflicts you , that pleases them . However , if you keep patience and guard yourselves against evil persistently , their deceitfulness would do you no harm . And Allah indeed has encompassed all that they are doing .
And ( recall the time ) when early morning you left your blessed abode ( on the eve of the battle of Uhud ) and were positioning the Muslims at their posts for the battle . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
When two groups from amongst you ( Banu Salma Khazraj and Banu Haritha Aws ) intended to go coward although Allah was their Ally . And the believers must have trust in Allah alone .
And Allah provided you help in the battle of Badr , whereas you had little resources ( at that time ) . Therefore , fear Allah so that you may become grateful .
When you were saying to the believers : Is it not enough for you that your Lord should reinforce you with three thousand sent - down angels ?
Yes , if you remain steadfast and persist in God - wariness and these ( unbelievers ) suddenly launch the blitz against you with ( full ) force , then your Lord would come to your aid with distinctly marked five thousand angels .
And Allah has made this ( reinforcement ) just a glad tidings for you so that it may content your hearts . And support comes only from Allah Who is Almighty , Most Wise .
( Also ) because ( Allah ) may exterminate a section of the unbelievers or abase them so that they go back defeated .
( O Beloved ! Now ) this matter is not your concern whether Allah enables them to repent or torments them , because they are the transgressors .
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth belongs to Allah alone . He forgives whom He wills and He punishes whom He wills and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Do not live on usury doubled and redoubled and keep fearing Allah so that you may prosper .
And fear that Fire which has been prepared for those who reject faith .
And persist in obedience to Allah and the Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) so that you may be blessed with Mercy .
And advance fast towards forgiveness from your Lord and Paradise whose vastness encompasses the heavens and the earth ( and ) which has been prepared for the pious .
They are the ones who spend in the cause of Allah whether they are affluent or indigent ( in both the conditions ) , sublimate their anger and tolerate ( the faults of the ) people ; and Allah loves those who are benevolent .
And ( they ) are such people that if they commit some immoral act or wrong themselves , they remember Allah , then seek forgiveness for their sins . And who forgives sins except Allah ? And they do not deliberately persist in the sinful acts which they committed .
It is they whose reward is forgiveness from their Lord and Gardens beneath which rivers flow . They will reside therein permanently . What an excellent reward there is for those who execute righteous acts !
Before you many codes ( of Divine Law ) have passed ( for the preceding nations ) . So travel in the earth and observe what was the end of those who belied !
This Quran is an exposition for mankind and guidance and counsel for those who fear Allah .
And do not lose heart nor feel grieved ; and it is you who will be victorious , provided you maintain ( perfect ) faith .
If you have received a blow ( now , then remember that ) they too have received a similar blow already . These are the days which We rotate among people . And these ( ups and downs ) occur so that Allah may distinguish the identity of true believers and bestow upon some of you the status of martyr . And Allah does not like the wrongdoers .
And this is ( also ) with the intention that Allah may bring ( more ) refinement to the believers ( i . e . cleanse and purify them ) and annihilate the disbelievers .
Do you assume that you will enter Paradise ( without any good ) whereas Allah has not yet tested those of you who combat for His cause , nor has He judged the steadfast ?
And you used to long for death ( of a martyr ) before you faced it . So now you have seen it in front of your own eyes .
And Muhammad ( [ too ] Allah bless him and give him peace ) is but only a Messenger ( and not God ) . Many a Messenger has passed away ( from this world ) before him as well ( bearing adversities and turmoils ) . So , if he passes away or is martyred , will you then turn on your heels ( back to your former religion i . e . will you consider his death or martyrdom - God forbid - based on either falsehood of Din [ religion ] of Islam or his untrue Messengership ) ? And whoever turns back on his heels shall not harm Allah the least . And Allah will soon reward those who give thanks ( by remaining steadfast in hardship ) .
And no one can die without Allahs Command . ( His ) term has been fixed in writing . And whoever desires the reward of this world , We give him of that ; and whoever longs for the reward of the Hereafter , We give him of that ; and soon shall We pay reward ( affluently ) to those who pay thanks .
And how many a Prophet has there been who fought in the cause of Allah ! A large number of devotees of Allah ( Awliya ) also joined them . They did not lose heart due to hardships which afflicted them in the way of Allah . They neither showed weakness nor gave in . And Allah loves those who remain steadfast .
And they said nothing except this supplication : O our Lord , forgive our sins and overlook the excesses that we committed in our work , and keep us firm - footed ( on Your path ) and bestow upon us victory over the disbelievers .
So , Allah paid them the reward of this world and also an excellent recompense in the Hereafter . And Allah loves ( those ) righteous people ( who are in love with Him alone ) .
O Believers ! If you obey the disbelievers , they will turn you back on your heels ( to disbelief ) . You will then turn back as losers .
Nay , Allah is your Maula ( Helper and Guardian ) and He is the best of helpers .
Soon shall We plant ( your ) awe into the hearts of disbelievers because they have associated that partner with Allah for which He has not sent down any authority . And Hell is their abode and extremely horrible is ( that ) abode of the wrongdoers .
Surely , Allah fulfilled His promise to you when you were killing them by His command until you showed cowardice and you started disputing about the command ( of the Messenger , [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and later disobeyed ( him ) whereas Allah had brought that victory in your sight which you coveted . Among you were some who desired gains of this world and some others who sought reward in the Hereafter . Then He turned you back from them ( dominated ) so that He tests you . ( Later , however , ) He pardoned you and Allah is Most Gracious to the believers .
When you were running away ( in panic ) and did not look back at anyone and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) was calling you out ( standing ) among the party that were ( steadfast ) in your rear . Then He inflicted upon you sorrows one after the other ( for admonition and training ) so that you might not grieve over what you had lost and the calamity that had befallen you . And Allah is Aware of your works .
Then after grief He sent down on you calm ( and peace for relief ) in the form of a slumber that overtook a party of you , while another party ( comprising hypocrites that ) was worried only about their own souls indulged in false assumptions about Allah which were ( just ) the assumptions of ignorance . They say : Do we too have anything ( i . e . authority ) in this matter ? Say : The whole matter is in the Hand of Allah . They have concealed in their hearts things which they let not be disclosed to you . They say : Had we any say in this matter we would not have been slain here . Say : Had you been ( even ) in your homes , those for whom killing was decreed would have come over to their slaughter places . And that has been ( done ) so that Allah may test what is in your breasts and purge exhaustively the ( apprehensions ) pent up in your hearts . And Allah has thorough knowledge of the secrets of breasts .
Certainly , those of you who fled on that day when the two armies engaged in fierce fighting were only caused by Satan to slip , owing to some act they had perpetrated . Allah pardoned them indeed . He is , of course , Most Forgiving , Most Forbearing .
O Believers ! Be not like the infidels who say of those of their brothers who go ( somewhere ) on a journey or go to fight ( and die there ) : Had they stayed with us they would neither have died nor been slain , so that Allah may make this ( assumption ) a regret in their hearts . It is Allah Who keeps alive and causes death . And Allah keeps a strict eye on what you do .
And if you get slain in the cause of Allah or die , Allahs Forgiveness and Mercy is far better than that ( wealth ) which you accumulate .
And if you die or be slain , you ( all ) will be brought together before Allah .
( O My Adorable Beloved ! ) What a Mercy of Allah that you are lenient with them ! Had you been stern and hard - hearted , people would have deserted , scattering away from around you . So pardon them , and pray for their forgiveness , and consult them in ( important ) matters . But once you make up your mind , then place your trust in Allah . Surely Allah loves those who trust Him .
If Allah helps you , none can overpower you ; but if He abandons you taking away all support , then who is it that can help you after Him ? And the believers should rely on Allah alone .
It is just not conceivable about any Prophet that he would conceal anything . And whoever hides away ( anothers right ) will have to bring forth on the Day of Resurrection whatever he had held back . Then everyone will be paid in full for his deeds , and they will not be wronged .
How can a person who has subjected himself to the will of Allah be like the one who has earned Allahs wrath ? And Hell is his abode and that is an extremely evil dwelling .
They have varying grades in the sight of Allah and Allah thoroughly observes their acts .
Indeed Allah conferred a great favour on the believers that He raised among them ( the most eminent ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) from among themselves who recites to them His Revelations , purifies them and educates them on the Book and Wisdom though , before that , they were in manifest error .
Is it not that when disaster seized you , while you had inflicted twice as much ( on your enemy ) , you said : Whence has it befallen ? Say : It is from your own selves . Indeed , Allah has Absolute Control over everything .
And the agony that hurt you on the day when the two armies clashed with each other came about ( only ) by Allahs Command . And ( this happened ) so that Allah establishes the identity of the believers .
And ( He ) also distinguishes the identity of those who are hypocrites . And when it was said to them : Come and fight in the cause of Allah or defend ( against the enemy invasion ) , they said : If we knew that there would be a war ( actually of some kind or had we considered it a war in the cause of Allah ) we would certainly follow you . That day they were closer to an evident disbelief as compared to ( the pretended ) belief . They utter that from their mouths which is not in their hearts . And Allah knows well ( the matters ) which they hide .
( They ) are the ones who said about their brothers while they themselves stayed back ( home ) : Had they accepted our counsel , they would not have been slain . Say : Protect yourselves from death if you are truthful .
And do not ( ever ) think that those who are slain in the way of Allah are dead . They are rather alive in the Presence of their Lord . They are served with sustenance ( comprising bounties of Paradise ) .
They rejoice in these ( blessings of eternal life ) which Allah has conferred on them of His Bounty and also feel pleased ( on finding ) their successors ( on the path of faith and obedience ) , who have not ( yet ) joined them , for they shall also have neither any fear nor any grief .
They are filled with joy owing to the blessing ( of divine disclosures of the nearness ) of Allah and His Bounty ( of pleasures of Union with Him ) and ( also ) because Allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
Those who submitted to the Command of Allah and His Messenger even after sustaining injuries for those of them who possess spiritual excellence and are God - fearing , there is immense reward .
They are the ones whom people said : The adversaries have gathered ( in great number ) against you , so fear them . But this ( information ) further enhanced their faith and they proclaimed : Allah is Sufficient for us and what an excellent Guardian He is !
Then they ( the Muslims ) returned with the bounties and blessings of Allah , untouched by any suffering . They followed the will of Allah , and Allah is the Lord of Great Bounty .
Surely this ( informer ) is Satan alone who threatens ( you ) through his friends . Therefore , do not fear them and fear Me alone if you are the believers .
( O Sympathizer of the whole mankind ! ) Those who hasten in ( reinforcing ) disbelief should not aggrieve you . They cannot do any damage to ( the Din [ Religion ] of ) Allah and Allah intends that there is no share for them in the Hereafter . And for them there is severe torment .
Indeed those who buy disbelief at the cost of belief cannot harm Allah the least , and for them there is grievous torment .
And the disbelievers must never assume that the respite We are providing them is of any good for their souls . We are granting them ( this ) respite for the reason that they may grow further in sins . And ( ultimately ) there is for them a humiliating torment .
And Allah will never leave the Muslims in the status quo you are caught in ( now ) until He distinguishes the impure from the pure . And it is not Allahs Glory that , ( O common people , ) he reveals to you the Unseen . However , Allah chooses from among His Messengers whom He wills ( for the knowledge of the unseen ) . Therefore , put faith in Allah and His Messengers . And if you embrace faith and become God - fearing , there is a tremendous reward for you .
And those who are niggardly in giving away ( from the wealth ) which Allah has bestowed upon them out of His bounty must never consider this miserliness of any benefit for themselves ; it is rather injurious to them . Soon on the Day of Resurrection this wealth , which they are niggardly about , will be put around ( their necks ) like a neck - fetter . To Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth ( i . e . He will remain the Owner of the universe after your death in the same way as He owns it today ) . And Allah is Well Aware of all your deeds .
Allah has , surely , heard the remarks of those who say : Allah is indigent and we are rich . We shall keep a written record of all that they say and their unjust killing of Messengers ( as well ) . And ( on the Day of Resurrection ) We shall say : ( Now you ) taste the incinerating torment .
This is the recompense of your deeds that your hands have forwarded ahead and Allah , indeed , does not do injustice to servants .
The people ( Jews ) who say ( as a justification ) : Allah sent to us the Command not to put faith in any Messenger unless he brings us an offering ( to prove his Messengership ) whom fire will ( break out to ) devour . Say ( to them ) : Certainly many Messengers with evident Signs preceded me and also ( came ) with the Sign which you speak of . Then ( despite that ) why did you martyr them if you are ( so ) truthful ?
If , even then , they belie you , ( My Beloved , do not be aggrieved ) . So many Messengers were belied before you who brought clear Signs ( miracles ) , Scriptures and the Enlightening Book .
Every soul is going to taste death . And your full recompense shall be paid back only on the Day of Resurrection . So , whoever will be saved from Hell and admitted to Paradise will be truly successful . And the worldly life is nothing but illusory wealth .
( O Believers ! ) You shall most certainly be tested in your possessions and your selves . And of course you shall have also to hear many torturing ( taunts ) from those who were given the Book before you and who are polytheists . But if you remain patient and stick to self - protection , that is one of the works demanding high resolve .
And when Allah took a firm promise from those who were given the Book : You shall communicate it clearly and plainly to the people and shall not hide ( whatever is described in it ) , they cast this promise behind their backs and sold it for a paltry price . This is an extremely evil transaction on their part .
Never regard those ( as the emancipated ones ) who rejoice over their crooked works and want to be praised for the deeds that they have never done . ( Proclaimed for emphasis : ) never think that they are delivered from punishment ; and for them is an awful torment .
The Sovereignty of all the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone and Allah has Perfect Control over everything . ( So focus your attention on and trust in Him alone . )
Indeed in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day there are Signs ( of Allahs Absolute Authority ) for those who possess constructive wisdom .
These are the people who , remembering Allah , remain standing ( as the epitome of submissiveness ) , sitting ( as reverence incarnate ) and ( also keep ) changing sides ( in discomfort of love ) and meditate on ( manifest lustre of His Eminence and Beauty at work in ) the creation of the heavens and the earth . ( Then acquainted with the pleasure of His gnosis , they call out spontaneously : ) O our Lord , You have not created ( all ) this without any rationale and strategy . You are impeccably Pure ( of all shortcomings and obligations ) . So protect us from the torment of Hell .
O our Lord ! Indeed whomever You admit to Hell , You have surely humiliated him and the wrongdoers do not have any supporters .
O our Lord ! ( We were oblivious of You , ) then we heard a Caller , calling towards faith : ( O people , ) believe in your Lord . So we embraced faith . O our Lord , now forgive our sins and erase our blunders ( from the record of our works ) and make us die in the company of the pious .
O our Lord ! Grant us all that You have promised us through Your Messengers and do not humiliate us on the Day of Resurrection . Surely , You do not go against Your promise .
Then their Lord accorded approval to their supplication ( and said : ) Certainly I do not waste wages of any labourer whether man or woman ; you all are from one another . So those who have emigrated ( for the cause of Allah ) and have been driven out of their dwellings ( for Him alone ) and have been offended in My way , and fought for My sake and were slain , I shall verily erase their sins from their record of works and admit them to the Gardens beneath which rivers flow . This is the reward from Allah and ( even ) better reward ( than this ) lies with Allah alone .
( O servant of Allah ! ) The roaming about of the disbelievers in the cities ( with luxurious riches ) should not cause you any illusion .
This is an insignificant possession ( for a brief period ) . Then their abode will be Hell and that is a very evil abode .
But those who persist in fearing their Lord , for them there are Gardens beneath which rivers flow . There will they reside forever . This is hospitaility ( for them ) from Allah . And ( His chamber of Proximity , lustre of His Beauty and the Blessing of Union with Him , in sum , ) whatever there is with Allah is excellent for the pious .
And indeed some People of the Book are such that they believe in Allah and also ( have faith in ) the Book that has been revealed to you and the one which was sent down to them . Their hearts remain subdued before Allah . And they do not receive paltry price for the Revelations of Allah . They are the ones whose reward lies with their Lord . Indeed Allah is Swift at reckoning .
O Believers ! Be steadfast and in perseverance ( and tenacity ) toil ( even harder than the enemy ) and be alert and vigilant ( for struggle against violation of peace and human rights ) , and ( always ) persist in fearing Allah so that you may achieve success .
O Mankind ! Fear your Lord Who ( initiated ) your creation from a single soul , then from it created its mate , and from these two spread ( the creation of ) countless men and women . So , fear Allah for Whose sake you solicit needs from one another . And ( become God - fearing ) towards your own kith and kin ( as well ) . Allah is indeed Ever - Watchful over you .
And deliver to the orphans their belongings ; and do not exchange the bad for the good ; nor consume their wealth by mixing it with your own . Indeed this is a great sin .
And if you have the apprehension that you will not be able to treat the orphan girls justly then marry the women you like and who are lawful for you , two or three or four ( but this sanction is conditional on justice ) . Then if you fear that you will not be able to treat ( more than one wife ) justly then ( marry ) only one woman or the maids who have come under your possession ( in accordance with the Islamic law ) . This makes it more likely that you restrain you from committing injustice .
And pay the women their dower with a pleased heart . Then if they forgo for you some ( of the dower ) out of their own pleasure , you may consume it as pleasant and favourable ( for you ) .
And do not entrust to the mentally deficient your ( or their ) assets which Allah has made a means of stability for your economy . However , feed them out of it and clothe them , and say to them good and nice words .
And evaluate and test the orphans ( for the sake of their training ) till they attain to ( the age of ) marriage . Then if you discern in them ingenuity ( and the knack of planning ) , hand over their assets to them . And devour not their wealth spending it wastefully and in haste ( fearing that after ) they grow mature ( they will take it back ) . The one who is affluent must absolutely abstain ( from the orphans property ) but he who is indigent ( himself ) should consume but a fair portion of it ( only ) . And when you return to them their assets , take witnesses over them . And Sufficient is Allah at reckoning .
Men have a share in ( the assets ) that their parents and nearest kin leave behind and women ( also ) have a share in the inheritance of their parents and the nearest kin . Be it small or large , the share has been fixed ( by Allah ) .
If the relatives ( other than heirs ) and the orphans and the indigent are present on the occasion of division ( of inheritance ) , give them also something out of it and say to them good and nice words .
And the people ( who execute matters of orphans ) should fear that ( while dying ) if they were to leave tender offspring behind , ( how ) frightened ( and worried ) would they be over the plight of their children ! They should , therefore , keep fearing Allah ( in the matter of orphans ) and should say the things straight .
Indeed those who eat up the property of orphans unjustly fill their bellies but with fire , and soon will they fall into a Blazing Fire .
Allah commands you concerning ( inheritance of ) your children : The share of a son is equal to that of two daughters ; then if there are only daughters ( two or ) more , they are entitled to two - thirds of the inheritance ; if there is only one daughter , her share will be one half ; the mother and the father of the deceased will get one - sixth of the inheritance each , if the deceased leaves children behind ; but in case the deceased has no children and the heirs are only his mother and his father , the mothers share is one - third ( and the rest is the fathers ) ; then , if he has brothers and sisters , the mother will have a sixth portion . This distribution will be ( executed ) after ( the fulfilment of ) the will he may have made or after ( the payment of ) the debt . You know not which of them , whether your parents or your sons , are closer to you in bringing you benefit . This ( distribution ) is a duty assigned ( i . e . fixed ) by Allah . Surely , Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And for you , the share in the property your wives leave is one half , provided they have no children . In case they have offspring then for you there is one - fourth of inheritance , ( that too ) after ( the fulfilment of ) the will that may have been made or after ( the payment of ) debt . And the share of your wives in the assets you leave is one - forth , provided you have no children . But if you have children then their share in your inheritance is one - eighth , after ( the fulfilment of ) the will made pertaining to ( the inheritance ) or the payment of ( your ) debt . In the case of a man or a woman who leaves neither parents nor children , but who has a brother or a sister ( on the mothers side i . e . a uterine brother or a sister ) , there is a one - sixth share for each of the two . But if they are more than that , they all will be sharers in one - third . ( This division shall also be accomplished ) after the will which is made without any prejudice towards the heirs or after the ( payment ) of debt . This is a Command from Allah and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Forbearing .
These are the limits set by Allah . And the one who obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) , He ( Allah ) will admit him to the Gardens beneath which rivers flow . They shall reside therein forever , and this is a great achievement .
But whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and exceeds His limits , He will admit him to Hell wherein shall he live forever ; and there is a humiliating torment for him .
And those of your women who commit adultery , call in from your men four witnesses against them . Then if they produce evidence , confine those women to their houses till death completes their term of life or Allah ordains a way ( i . e . a new injunction ) for them .
And the two persons from among you who commit adultery , afflict them both . Then , if they repent and mend ( their ) ways , refrain from punishing them . Indeed Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Allah has promised to accept the repentance of only those who commit evil deeds due to ignorance , then repent soon after . So Allah will return to such people with His Mercy and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
But repentance is not ( accepted ) of the people who persist in sinful acts until death overtakes one of them , ( then ) he says : Now I repent . Nor is repentance ( of any avail ) for those who die as disbelievers . We have prepared grievous torment for them .
O Believers ! It is not lawful for you to become heirs to women by force . And do not hold them back in order to take ( back ) from them a portion of that which you gave them , unless they commit open indecency . And treat them honourably . Then if you dislike them , it may be that you dislike a thing and Allah places in it abundant good .
And if you seek to take a wife in place of another and you have ( by now ) given to her heaps of wealth , yet do not take back any part of it . Do you want to take that wealth ( back ) by means of unjust accusation and manifest sin ?
And how can you take it back while you have had marital relations with each other and they have ( also ) taken a firm promise from you ?
And do not marry women whom your fathers and forefathers married . But that which has passed ( before this command is forgiven ) . It is indeed highly indecent , infuriating and an evil custom .
Forbidden to you are your mothers , your daughters , your sisters , your fathers sisters and your mothers sisters and your brothers daughters and sisters daughters and your mothers ( who ) have suckled you , your foster sisters and mothers of your wives . And ( similarly ) your stepdaughters brought up under your parentage born of your women with whom you have had marital relations ( are also forbidden to you . ) If you have not had martial relations , then there is no harm ( in marrying their daughters ) . Forbidden are also wives of your real sons who are of your loins and having ( in marriage ) two sisters together , except that which has passed in the days of ignorance . Allah indeed is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And ( forbidden to you are also ) women having husbands except those ( prisoners of war ) who come into your legal possession . Allah has prescribed for you ( these Commands of forbiddance ) . And ( all women ) other than these are made lawful for you , so that you may wish them for marriage by means of your money ( dower ) , maintaining chastity and not in pursuit of satisfying lust . Then those of them from whom you have received benefit in exchange for that ( money ) , pay them their fixed dowers . And there is no sin on you pertaining to the money on which you mutually agree after fixing the dower . Surely Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And whoever of you cannot afford to marry free believing women may marry those believing slave girls who are in your possession ( under Islamic Law ) . And Allah knows best ( the state of ) your belief . You ( all ) are one from another . So , marry these ( slave girls ) with the permission of their masters , and pay them their dowers according to custom , provided they are wedlocked ( being chaste ) , neither committing illegal sex nor taking secret lovers . If they commit fornication after they have entered into wedlock , their punishment will be the half of that ( appointed ) for free ( unmarried ) women . This permission is for him among you who fears ( indulging in ) sin and if you practise self - restraint that is better for you . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Allah intends to explain to you ( His Commands ) and guide you to the ways of those ( pious ) people who have passed before you and return to you in Mercy . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And Allah intends to bestow upon you His Favour , but those who pursue the lusts ( of the ill - commanding selves ) wish you to turn far away from the right path .
Allah intends to lighten your burden . And man has been created weak ( and infirm ) .
O Believers ! Do not devour one anothers wealth unlawfully among yourselves unless it is a trade by your mutual agreement and do not kill yourselves . Surely , Allah is Kind to you .
But whoever will do that through transgression and injustice , We shall soon throw him into the Fire ( of Hell ) and that is very easy for Allah .
If you keep abstaining from major sins that you are forbidden to do We shall remove from you your minor sins and shall admit you to a place of honour .
And do not long for the thing in which Allah has made some of you superior to others . Men will have a share of what they earn , and women will have a share of what they earn , and keep begging Allah for His Bounty . Surely Allah knows best everything .
And We have appointed to everyone legatees ( heirs ) of the property left by parents and near relations . And to those with whom you have made an agreement , give them their share . Assuredly , Allah observes everything .
Men are guardians and managers over women , because Allah has made one superior to the other and ( also ) because men spend their wealth ( on them ) . So the pious wives are obedient . They guard ( their chastity ) in the absence of their husbands with the protection of Allah . But those women whom you fear would disobey and defy , admonish them ; and ( if they do not amend , ) separate them ( from yourselves ) in beds ; and ( if they still do not improve , ) beat them ( softly to bring reform ) . Then if they become obedient to you , do not seek any way ( to oppress ) them . Surely , Allah is Most High , Most Great .
And if you fear a breach between the two then appoint one arbitrator from the husbands family and the other from the wifes family . If both ( the arbitrators ) resolve to bring about settlement , Allah will create harmony between them . Indeed , Allah is All - Knowing , All - Aware .
And worship Allah and do not set up any partners with Him . And treat the parents with moral excellence and ( do good to ) relatives , orphans , the needy , close as well as unacquainted neighbours , and your fellows and the wayfarers and those whom you possess . Surely Allah does not like the one who is arrogant ( self - conceited ) and boastful ( egoist ) .
Those who are miserly and bid others ( also ) to be miserly , and hide that ( blessing ) which Allah has granted them of His Bounty . And We have prepared a disgraceful torment for the disbelievers .
And those who spend their wealth to show off to people , and believe neither in Allah nor in the Last Day . And whoever Satan sides with as a companion , so he is an evil companion !
And what loss would they have suffered if they had believed in Allah and the Last Day , and spent ( in His way ) of what Allah had given them ? And Allah is Well Aware of them ( their state of affairs ) .
Surely , Allah does not do ( even ) an iota of injustice and if there be a good work , He doubles it and grants from His Presence an immense reward .
Then how it will be on the Day when We shall bring one witness from each Umma ( Community ) , and , ( O Beloved , ) We shall bring you as a witness against them all !
On that Day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) would wish that ( after burying them ) the earth over them were levelled . And they will not be able to hide anything from Allah .
O Believers ! Do not go near Prayer in a drunken state until you are able to understand what you say . Nor ( should you approach Prayer ) until you bathe after total ablution becomes obligatory unless you are travelling . And if you are sick or on a journey or return from a call of nature or make sexual contact with ( your ) women and then fail to find water , clean yourselves by using pure soil . So wipe your faces and hands . Surely , Allah is Most Pardoning , Most Forgiving .
Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the ( revealed ) Book ? They buy misguidance and want you ( also ) to turn away from the straight path .
And Allah knows best your enemies and Allah is Sufficient ( as ) a Protector and Allah is Sufficient ( as ) a Helper .
And some among the Jews pervert the words ( of the Torah ) from their ( root ) places and say : We have heard but we disobey , and ( also say ) : Listen ! ( God forbid ! ) May you not be listened to , and twisting their tongues , scoffing at Din ( Religion ) they say : Raina . And , ( instead , ) if they had said : We have heard and obeyed , and ( Your Eminence ! Please ) give audience ( to our request ) and bless us with a ( benevolent and kind ) look , that would have been better for them and ( this utterance ) would have been right and appropriate ( too ) but Allah has cursed them owing to their disbelief . So they do not believe except a few .
O People of the Book ! Believe in ( that Book ) which We have revealed ( now to Our Beloved Muhammad , [ blessing and peace be upon him ] ) which ( originally ) confirms the Book that is with you , before We disfigure ( features of some ) faces and turn them on to their rear , or cast on them a curse like the one that We cast on those ( who disobeyed ) in the case of Sabbath . And the Commandment of Allah is bound to be executed .
Surely , Allah does not forgive setting up of partners with Him , and He forgives ( any other sin ) lesser in degree whom He wills . And whoever sets up partners with Allah certainly fabricates a horrible sin .
Have you not seen the people who show themselves off as pure ? Nay , Allah is the One Who purifies whom He pleases and they will not be wronged even equal to a thread .
Look ! How they invent a lie against Allah , and this manifest sin is simply sufficient ( for afflicting them with torment ) !
Have you not seen those who have been given a portion of ( the revealed ) Book ? ( In spite of that ) they believe in idols and Satan . And about the disbelievers they say : These ( disbelievers ) are better guided than the believers .
These are the people Allah has cursed , and you will not find at all any helper for the one whom Allah curses .
Have they any share in the Kingdom ? If so , they would not give ( anything ) to the people worth even a speck ( because of their niggardliness ) .
Do they ( Jews ) feel jealous of the people because of ( the blessings ) which Allah has conferred upon them of His Bounty ? So , surely We have given the family of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) the Book and wisdom , and We also granted them a great kingdom .
So , some of them believed in it and some turned away from it , and ( for those who turn away ) enough is the blazing Fire of Hell .
Surely those who disbelieved in Our Revelations , We shall soon hurl them into the Fire ( of Hell ) . When their skins are burnt off , We shall replace them with other skins so that they may taste the torment ( ceaselessly ) . Surely , Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Those who believe and stick to doing pious acts , We shall admit them to Gardens beneath which streams flow . They shall live there forever . Therein shall be pure spouses for them . And We shall admit them into plenteous deep shades .
Surely , Allah commands you to entrust the belongings to those who are worthy of them ; and when you judge matters among people , give judgment with justice . What an excellent advice Allah gives you ! Surely , Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
O Believers ! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and those ( men of Truth ) who hold command among you . Then if you disagree among yourselves over any issue , refer it to Allah and the Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] for final judgment ) if you believe in Allah and the Last Day . That is best ( for you ) and best for the end result .
Have you not seen these ( hypocrites ) who claim ( verbally ) that they believe in this ( Book i . e . the Quran , ) which has been revealed to you and also in those ( revealed Books ) which were sent down before you ? ( But ) they desire to take their disputes ( for settlement ) to Satan ( i . e . the law based on defiance against Allahs Commandments ) although they have been ordained to reject it ( openly ) . And Satan only desires to lead them far astray .
And when they are asked to come to what Allah has revealed ( the Quran ) and to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , you will see that the hypocrites turn away from ( coming towards ) you .
Then what will be their plight ( at that time ) when some disaster befalls them on account of their own crooked works , and they will appear before you swearing by Allah , ( saying ) : We intended nothing but piety and mutual harmony ?
These are the ( hypocrite and vicious ) people that Allah knows best every secret of their hearts . So , avoid them and admonish them persistently and establish effective communication with them about themselves .
And We have not sent any Messenger but that he must be obeyed by the Command of Allah . And , ( O Beloved , ) if they , having wronged their souls , had come to you imploring the forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) had also asked forgiveness for them , then ( owing to this mediation and intercession ) they would certainly have found Allah Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
So , ( O Beloved , ) by your Lord they cannot become true believers until they make you a judge in every dispute that arises among them , and thereafter they do not feel any resentment in their hearts against the judgment that you make , and submit ( to your decision ) gladly , with total submission .
If We had prescribed for them : Kill yourselves or leave your homes and go away , only a few of them would have acted upon it . If they had abided by what they were advised to do , that would have been in their favour , enabling them to hold fast tenaciously ( to the Faith ) .
And then We too would have bestowed upon them a great reward from Our Presence .
And We would have surely guided them to the straight path .
And whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , they are the people who shall be in the company of those ( spiritual dignitaries on the Last Day ) whom Allah has blessed with His ( special ) favour : the Prophets , the Truthful , the Martyrs and the Most Pious . And how excellent these companions are !
This ( exceptional ) Bounty is from Allah and Allah suffices as a Knower .
O Believers ! Fit out for your safeguard , then set out as separate units or march off all together ( to stirve hard and eliminate militancy and terrorism ) .
And certainly there are some among you who delay ( slackening intentionally ) . Then if ( during war ) some adversity befalls you , he ( who tarries behind ) says : Indeed Allah has favoured me that I was not present with them ( in the battlefield ) .
But if some favour comes to you from Allah , ( then ) the same ( hypocrite ) shall ( regretfully ) say ( in the manner ) as if there was no friendship between you and him : Would that I had been with them , then I would also have achieved massive triumph .
So they ( the believers ) should fight in the cause of Allah ( for the promotion of good and human dignity ) who sell the life of this world for the Hereafter . And whoso fights in the way of Allah , whether he ( himself ) gets slain or wins victory , ( in both cases ) We shall soon bless him with great reward .
What has happened to you ( Muslims , ) that you do not fight in the cause of Allah ( for the freedom of the oppressed ) whereas those helpless ( oppressed and tyrannized ) men , women and children who , ( depressed by the oppression and tyranny , ) call out ( for their freedom ) : O our Lord ! Rescue us from this town whose ( affluent and influential ) people are oppressors and appoint for us some guardian from Your Presence and make someone our helper from Your Presence .
Those who believe fight in the way of Allah ( for the cause of peace and libration of the oppressed ) , and those who disbelieve fight in the way of Satan ( for evil and mischievous objectives ) . So , ( O Believers , ) fight against Satans allies ( the supporters of Satans mission ) . Surely Satans maneuvering is ineffective .
Have you not observed the state of those who were instructed ( in the beginning for a short period ) : Restrain your hands ( from fighting ) and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly ? ( So they were happy with it . ) But when the armed struggle ( against evil , tyranny and oppression ) was prescribed for them , a section of them started fearing ( hostile ) people the way one fears Allah or even more . And they said : O our Lord ! Why have You enjoined fighting upon us ( so soon ) ? Why have You not given us respite for another short period ? Say ( to them ) : Worldly interest is minor ( immaterial ) while the Hereafter is an extremely valuable ( blessing ) for the one who becomes God - wary and pious . There , you shall not be treated unjustly even equal to a thread .
( O you who abstain from the armed struggle due to fear of death ! ) Death will overtake you wherever you may be , ( even ) if you are in unconquerable fortresses . And ( this is their mentality that ) if some good fortune ( benefit ) comes to them , they say : It is from Allah ( i . e . intermediation and benevolence of the Messenger has no role in it ) , and if some adversity befalls them , they say : ( O Messenger ! ) It is from you ( i . e . because of you ) . Say : ( In fact , ) all comes from Allah . So , what has gone wrong with these people that they do not feel inclined to understand anything ?
( O man ! Train your self this way that ) if some good fortune comes to you ( consider that ) it is from Allah ( do not attribute it to the excellence of your strategy ) . And when some misfortune befalls you ( believe that ) it is from yourself ( attribute it to the evil in your own self ) . And , ( O Beloved , ) We have sent you as a Messenger to the whole mankind and Allah is Sufficient as a witness ( to your Messengership ) .
Whoever obeys the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) obeys ( but ) Allah indeed , but he who turns away , then We have not sent you to watch over them .
And ( the state of these hypocrites is such that in your presence ) they say : ( We ) have obeyed ( your order ) . But when they depart from your Presence , a section of them opine at night contrary to what you have said ( and indulge in intriguing consultations ) . And Allah is recording ( all that ) which they plot all night . So , ( O Beloved , ) turn away your illumined face from them and trust Allah , and Sufficient is Allah as a Guardian .
Do they not ponder over the Quran ? Had this ( Quran come ) from anyone other than Allah , these people would have found in it many contradictions .
When there comes to them any news of peace or fear , they spread it around . Had they referred it to the Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) or those of them who are in command ( instead of making it public ) , then those among them who can draw conclusion from some matter would have found it ( i . e . the truth of the news ) . Had there not been Allahs Favour to you and His Mercy , certainly you would ( all ) have followed Satan except only a few .
So , ( O Beloved , ) fight in the cause of Allah . You will not be held responsible ( for anyone else ) but your own soul . And motivate the believers ( for fighting ) . It will be no wonder if Allah smashes the attacking power of the disbelievers . And Allah is Strongest in hold as well as Hardest in punishment .
Whoever makes a righteous intercession has a ( fixed ) share ( in its reward ) , and he who makes an evil intercession has a ( fixed ) share ( in its sin ) , and Allah has Full Control over everything .
And when you are honoured with ( a word of ) greeting , then ( in reply ) greet with a better ( salutation ) or ( at least ) reciprocate ( in the same words ) . Surely Allah takes an account of everything .
Allah is He apart from Whom there is none worthy of worship . He shall certainly gather you on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt . And who is more truthful in word than Allah ?
So what has happened to you that you are split into two groups with regard to the hypocrites , while Allah has overturned them ( i . e . their reason and contemplation ) owing to their misdeeds ? Do you seek to guide him to the straight road whom Allah has held strayed ( because of their own misdeeds ) ? And , ( O listener , ) you cannot at all find a way ( of guidance ) for him whom Allah holds misguided .
These ( the hypocrites ) wish that you should also disbelieve as they have disbelieved so that you all might become alike . So do not make friends with ( any of ) them until they emigrate in the Way of Allah ( in order to prove their faith and truthfulness ) . Then , if they turn away , seize them and kill them wherever you find them , and take not ( any of ) them either for a friend or for a helper .
But ( do not kill ) those who have allied with a people between you and whom there is a ( peace ) treaty , or who ( losing heart ) come to you in such a state that their breasts are afflicted ( with this obsession ) whether they should fight you or their own people . If Allah had so willed , He ( strengthening their hearts ) would have given them supremacy over you . Then they would certainly have fought you . So if they keep away from you and do not fight you and send you ( a message ) for peace , then ( in the interest of peace ) Allah has left no way open for you ( to launch any aggression ) against them .
Now you will find another category of people who desire to remain free of any threat from you ( by hypocritically pretending to believe ) , and ( also ) live in peace from their own community ( by siding with disbelievers secretly . But their true state is this that ) whenever they are turned to mischief ( and wickedness against Muslims ) they plunge ( headlong ) into it . So if they do not give up ( fighting against you , nor ) send you any ( message for ) peace , ( nor ) hold their hands off ( their disruptive activities ) , then seize ( and capture ) them and kill them wherever you find them . And it is they against whom We have granted you unrestricted authority .
And it is not ( lawful ) for a Muslim to kill a Muslim but by mistake ( i . e . unintentionally ) . And anyone who kills a Muslim unintentionally shall ( be liable to ) free a Muslim slave / slave girl and ( pay ) blood money , to be ( necessarily ) handed over to the heirs of the person slain , unless they remit it . In case , he ( the slain ) comes from the people who are your enemies and is a believer ( as well ) , then ( only ) freeing a slave / slave girl is prescribed . But if he ( the slain ) belongs to a people between you and whom is a ( peace ) treaty , then blood compensation must be delivered to his family , and freeing a Muslim slave / slave girl is also mandatory . Then he who does not find ( a slave or slave girl ) is ( bound ) to fast for two consecutive months . ( This is his ) repentance ( prescribed ) by Allah . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
But he who kills a Muslim deliberately , his sentence will be Hell wherein will he abide for ages . Allah will afflict him with His wrath and will cast His curse on him . And He has prepared for him a dreadful torment .
O Believers ! When you set out ( to fight ) in the way of Allah , carry out a careful probe and do not say to him who greets you ( as a Muslim ) : You are not a believer . You seek goods of worldly life ( in the shape of spoils of war , after killing a Muslim declaring him a disbeliever ) . So , ( rest assured that ) Allah has gains and booties in plenty . Before this you ( too ) were the same . Then Allah conferred on you His Favour ( and you became Muslims ) . So investigate and confirm the truth ( about others as well ) . Surely , Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
Those of the Muslims who ( shirking fight ) stay back ( home ) without any stressful condition ( excuse ) , and those who fight in the cause of Allah with their material as well as human resources cannot be equal ( in their reward and grading ) . Allah has exalted in rank those who fight in the cause of Allah with their material as well as human resources above those who stay back withdrawn . Allah has ( surely ) promised good to all ( the believers , yet ) He has bestowed the merit of excellence with a mighty reward ( and bounty ) to those who strive hard over those who stay behind .
There are ( for them multiple ) degrees of higher grades from Him and Forgiveness and Mercy . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed those whose lives angels take in such a state that ( due to living in an environment of injustice , oppression and extremism ) they have ruined their souls , the angels ask them : What condition were you in ? ( You neither struggled to promote justice , tolerance and peace nor left for the land of equity and peace . ) They ( regretfully ) reply : We were powerless and helpless in the land . The angels will say : Was not Allahs earth vast enough for you to emigrate in it ( somewhere ) ? So it is they whose abode is Hell , and what an evil abode that is !
Except for those really helpless men , women and children who neither are capable to make any plan nor do they know any way ( to escape from there ) .
They are those whom Allah shall certainly spare , and Allah is Most Pardoning , Most Forgiving .
And he who emigrates leaving his home in the way of Allah will find ( for Hijra - emigration ) many places in the earth and plentiful provision ( for sustenance ) , and he who leaves his home , emigrating towards Allah and His Messenger and then death overtakes him ( on the way ) , his reward with Allah is ensured and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And when you travel in the land , there will be no sin on you if you shorten the Prayer ( i . e . offer two instead of four mandatory cycles ) , if you fear that the disbelievers are likely to afflict you with distress . Assuredly , the disbelievers are your open enemies .
And , ( O Beloved , ) when you are ( present ) among these ( soldiers ) , form up for them ( congregational ) Prayer . A squad of them , retaining their arms , should ( first ) stand by you ( to follow you in Prayer ) ; having performed their prostrations , they should , ( getting aside , ) take position in your rear . And ( now ) another squad who has not ( yet ) prayed should come up and pray with you ( under your leadership ) ; they should ( also ) hold on to their security measures and retain their weapons ( persistently ) . The infidels want you to become neglectful of your weapons and other means of defence that they may launch a sudden attack against you . If you face a problem due to rain or disease , there is no harm if you ( remove and ) set your weapons aside , and hold fast to your means of security . Verily , Allah has prepared a humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
So , ( O Muslims , ) when you have finished your Prayers , remember Allah ( in all postures : ) standing , sitting and ( lying down ) on your sides . And when ( free of fear ) you feel secure , establish Prayers ( as prescribed ) . Verily , Prayer is obligatory for Muslims in accordance with the fixed timings .
And do not slacken in pursuing the foes . If you are afflicted with pain ( in this pursuit ) then they also face but ( similar ) suffering as you are exposed to . But you have hope ( of reward and bounty ) from Allah which they do not . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) Surely We have revealed to you the Book based on Truth so that you may judge between the people in accordance with ( the Truth ) which Allah has shown to you . And ( never ) become a contender on behalf of the treacherous ones .
And implore Allahs forgiveness . Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And do not plead ( in defence of ) those who are deceiving their own souls . Surely , Allah does not like anyone who is a committed betrayer and sinner .
They hide ( their deceitfulness ) from people ( feeling ashamed ) , but feel no shame before Allah while He is with them when they hold consultations ( secretly ) at night about that matter which Allah disapproves . And Allah has encompassed whatever they do .
Beware ! You are those who pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , but who will contend with Allah on their behalf ( even ) on the Day of Resurrection , or who will be their advocate ( on that Day too ) ?
And he who commits evil or wrongs his own soul and then seeks Allahs forgiveness will find Allah Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And whoever commits sin is only bringing ( its consequent misery ) to his own soul and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And whoever commits some error or sin and then casts its blame on some innocent person has certainly taken ( the burden of ) a calumny and an open sin .
And , ( O Beloved , ) had not Allahs Bounty and Mercy been upon you , a party of these ( treacherous ) people had resolved to lead you astray whereas they are only leading themselves astray and can no way do any harm to you . And Allah has revealed to you the Book and Wisdom and has bestowed upon you all that knowledge which you did not possess . Mighty indeed is Allahs Bounty on you .
There is no good in most of their secret consultations except only ( the counsel ) of the person who enjoins charity or piety or peace - making among people . And whoever does this seeking Allahs pleasure , We shall soon bless him with a mighty reward .
But whoever opposes the Messenger ( Allah bless him and give him peace ) after the path of guidance has become clear to him , and follows the path other than that of the believers , We shall keep him in the same ( state of disorientation ) he has ( himself ) turned to , and shall ( eventually ) cast him into Hell and that is an evil dwelling .
Assuredly , Allah does not forgive ( the sin of ) setting up any partner with Him , but He forgives any ( sin ) lesser than that whom He wills . And the one who associates anything with Allah as His partner has surely strayed far off .
These ( polytheists ) worship merely the feminine objects apart from Allah , and they worship only Satan , the rebel .
( Satan ) on whom Allah has laid His curse and who said : I will certainly pull off ( for myself ) an appointed portion of Your servants .
I will , for sure , lead them estray , arouse in them foul aspirations and keep directing them . So they will definitely incise the ears of cattle . And indeed I shall command them persistently . So they will surely alter what Allah has created . And whoever forsakes Allah and takes Satan for a friend suffers most certainly a perceptible loss .
Satan makes to them ( false ) promises and stirs up in them ( deceitful ) hopes , and Satan makes not any promise to them except deception .
They are the people whose abode is Hell and they shall not find any way to escape from it .
But those who have believed and kept doing pious acts , We shall soon admit them to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath . They shall reside in them for ever . This is Allahs true promise , and who can be more truthful in Word than Allah ?
( Allahs promise of salvation ) does not accord with what you desire , nor with what the People of the Book aspire to . Whoever does an evil deed will be punished for it , and he will not find for himself any supporter or helper apart from Allah .
But anyone , whether man or woman , who does pious acts and is a believer , they are the ones who shall enter Paradise and shall not be wronged a speck .
And with regard to Din ( Religion ) , who can be better than whoever submits his whole being entirely to Allah while he also holds spiritual excellence , and persistently follows Din ( Religion ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) a devotee ( to Allah and ) upright ? And Allah had taken Ibrahim ( Abraham ) for a sincere and intimate friend . ( So , he also becomes Allahs friend by virtue of his spiritual affiliation to Ibrahim [ Abraham ] . )
And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth and Allah has encompassed everything .
And , ( O Prophet , ) people ask about your edict on matters concerning ( orphan ) women . Say : Allah ordains you in their case and the commandment ( already ) being communicated to you in the holy Book ( also ) pertains to those orphan women whom you deny ( the rights ) which have been prescribed for them . And ( in order to take their assets into possession ) you want to marry them . In addition to that , there is ( also a decree ) on affairs concerning helpless minor children , that stick to justice in matters of orphans . And whatever good you do , Allah is indeed Well Aware of that .
If a woman fears maltreatment or indifference on the part of her husband , there is no harm if both ( husband and wife ) reconcile on some appropriate accord , and reconciliation ( in truth ) is best . The human nature has ( no doubt ) been made ( more or less ) self - seeking , but if you practise benevolence and guard yourselves against evil , Allah is indeed Well Aware of the works that you do .
And you simply do not have the ability to do ( ideal ) justice amongst your ( more than one ) wives , however ardently you may desire to do it . Do not , therefore , incline with absolute fondness ( towards one , thus ) leaving the other like something suspended ( in the midst ) . But if you mend your ways and refrain ( from injustice and maltreatment ) , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And if both ( husband and wife ) end up in separation , Allah will make each of them independent ( of the other ) out of His Own Abundance and Allah is All - Embracing , Most Wise .
And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . And no doubt We enjoined those ( too ) who were given the Book before you and ( have ordained ) you ( as well ) to keep fearing Allah . But if you disobey , then assuredly whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) belongs to Allah , and Allah is Beyond All Needs , Ever - Praiseworthy .
And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and enough is Allah to be the Guardian .
O People ! If He wills , He may eliminate you and bring others ( in your place ) and Allah is All - Powerful to do this .
Whoever desires the reward of the world , then with Allah is the reward of ( both ) the world and the Hereafter and Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
O Believers ! Become tenaciously firm on justice , bearing witness ( merely ) for the sake of Allah even if ( the witness ) is against your own selves or ( your ) parents or ( your ) relatives . Whether the person ( against whom is the evidence ) is rich or poor , Allah is a greater Well - Wisher of them both ( than you are ) . So do not follow the desires of your ( ill - commanding ) selves lest you swerve from justice . But if ( while giving evidence ) you engineer your statement or evade ( the truth ) , then Allah is indeed Well Aware of ( all the works ) that you are doing .
O Believers ! Put faith in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and in the Book which He has revealed to His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the Book that He revealed before ( it ) . And he who denies Allah , His angels , His Books , His Messengers and the Last Day has surely strayed far away .
Indeed those who believe , then disbelieve and then believe again and reject faith once more and then advance further in denying faith , Allah will never ( incline to ) forgive them , nor guide them to the straight road .
( O Prophet ! ) Convey to the hypocrites the news that a grievous torment awaits them .
( They are ) those who make friends with disbelievers instead of the believers . Do they seek honour in their company ? So , all veneration ( and glory ) belongs only to Almighty Allah .
And indeed Allah has revealed to you this ( Command ) in the Book that when you hear Allahs Revelations being denied and ridiculed , do not sit in their company until they engage in some other discourse ( renouncing the denial and ridicule ) . Otherwise you too will become like them . Surely Allah will assemble the hypocrites and the disbelievers together in Hell .
Those ( hypocrites ) who pry into your ( victory and setback ) , then if you are granted victory by Allah , they say : Were we not with you ? And if the disbelievers get a portion ( of some apparent breakthrough ) , they say ( to them ) : Did we not get the better of you and ( in spite of that ) did we not save you from ( ruin at the hands of ) Muslims ? So , Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection and never will Allah allow the disbelievers anyway to ( overpower ) the Muslims .
Surly the hypocrites ( self - deluding ) seek to deceive Allah while He is to make them suffer for their ( own ) deception . And when they stand up for Prayer , they do it sluggishly , ( simply ) for showing off to the people . And they ( also ) remember Allah but little .
Confounded between ( belief and disbelief ) , they belong neither to ( the disbelievers ) nor to ( the believers ) . And he whom Allah holds astray you shall not find for him any road ( to guidance ) .
O Believers ! Make not friends with disbelievers instead of believers . Do you wish to set a manifest evidence for Allah against you ( through friendship with the disbelievers ) ?
The hypocrites will surely be in the lowest depth of Hell and you will never find for them any helper .
But those who repent , make amends , and establish a firm bond with Allah , and make their Din ( faith and devotion ) sincerely for Allah will be in the company of the believers . And Allah will soon bestow a tremendous reward upon the believers .
Why should Allah torment you if you become grateful and believe ? And Allah is Most Appreciative ( of every truth ) , Well Aware ( of every act ) .
Allah does not like anyones foul words being voiced loud ( publicly and openly ) except by one who has been a victim of oppression ; ( he is allowed to expose the cruelty of the oppressor ; ) and Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Whether you make a good act known or keep it hidden or excuse some ( ones ) evil act , Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , All - Powerful .
Surely , those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers and seek to discriminate between Allah and His Messengers and say : We believe in some and deny the others , and intend to find a way in between ( belief and disbelief ) .
They are the ones who are in fact the disbelievers . And We have prepared a humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
But those who believed in Allah and ( all ) His Messengers and , ( in embracing faith , ) made no distinction between any of these ( Messengers ) , He would soon pay them their rewards . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O Beloved ! ) The People of the Book ask you to bring down to them a Book from heaven ( completely inscribed in one go ) . They asked Musa ( Moses ) for something even greater than that ; they said : Show us Allah visibly ( in Person ) . So owing to ( their ) transgression ( i . e . this denigrating demand ) a thunderbolt seized them . ( They died and were later raised to life by Musas ( Moses ) prayer . ) Then they adopted the calf ( as their god ) after the clear Signs ( pointing to the Truth ) had reached them . Then We overlooked this ( sin ) as well and bestowed upon Musa ( Moses ) a marked dominance over them .
And ( when the Jews again rejected the injunctions contained in the Torah , ) We raised ( and suspended the Mount of ) Tur over them in order to take a ( firm ) promise from them . And We commanded them : Enter the gate ( of this city - the Ailia gate ) prostrating ( in gratitude ) , and We ( also ) said to them : Do not also violate the Sabbath ( prohibition of fishing on Saturday ) , and We took from them a reiterated and firm promise .
So ( they were afflicted with punishments ) because of their breaking the promise , rejecting the Revelations of Allah , killing the Prophets unjustly ( and also owing to ) their saying : Our hearts are ( wrapped ) in covers . ( Nay , that was not the truth ; ) the fact is that Allah has sealed their hearts due to their disbelief . So , except for a few , they will not accept faith .
And ( moreover ) owing to their rejection of faith and uttering against Maryam ( Mary ) a grave calumny .
And ( also ) because of their uttering ( the boastful claim ) : We ( have ) killed Allahs Messenger , the Messiah , Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , whereas they neither killed nor crucified him . But ( in truth ) someone was made the like ( of Isa Jesus ) in their view . But those who disagree about him have surely fallen prey to doubt ( concerning ) this ( murder ) . They know nothing ( what the truth is ) except ( that they are ) following fancy . And they certainly did not murder Isa ( Jesus ) .
In fact Allah lifted him up towards Himself ( in heaven ) and Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And , ( shortly before the Last Hour at the time of the Messiahs descent , ) there will not be any ( individual or sect ) of the People of the Book but will ( rightly ) believe in Isa ( Jesus ) before his death ; and Isa ( Jesus ) will bear witness to them on the Day of Resurrection .
Then on account of injustice on the part of the Jews , We made unlawful for them ( many ) pure provisions that had been made lawful for them ( before ) , and ( also ) for the reason that they hindered ( people ) at a large scale from the path of Allah .
And ( also ) because of their taking usury , despite that they were forbidden to do it , and because of their usurping others wealth wrongfully ( they were punished ) . And We have prepared a torturous torment for those of them who disbelieve .
But those among them who possess substantial knowledge and faith ( equally ) believe in ( the Revelation ) that has been sent down to you and ( the Revelation ) that was sent down before you . And ( how righteous they are ! ) they establish the Prayer regularly , and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) persistently , and keep faith in Allah and the Day of Resurrection . They are the ones who We shall soon pay a mighty wage .
( O Beloved ! ) Indeed We have sent Revelation to you as We sent it to Nuh ( Noah ) and ( other ) Messengers after him ; and We also sent Revelation to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ismail ( Ishmael ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) , Yaqub ( Jacob ) and ( his ) children and Isa ( Jesus ) , Ayyub ( Job ) , Yunus ( Jonah ) , Harun ( Aaron ) and Sulaiman ( Solomon ) ; and We conferred the Zabur ( Book of Psalms ) upon Dawud ( David ) .
And ( We have sent many ) Messengers whose annals We have narrated to you earlier ; and We sent ( a number of ) those Messengers whose details We have not ( yet ) related to you ; and Allah ( also ) spoke to Musa ( [ Moses ] directly ) .
The Messengers who were Bearers of good news and Warners ( were sent ) so that after ( the arrival of these ) Messengers people may not have any plea against Allah . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
( O Beloved ! Whether somebody believes in your Prophethood or not , ) Allah ( Himself ) bears witness to ( this fact that ) whatever He has sent down to you has sent down with His knowledge . And the angels ( too ) bear witness to that effect ( for your sake ) , and Allah is All - Sufficient as a witness .
Verily , those who disbelieved ( i . e . belied the Prophethood of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and hindered ( people ) from the path of Allah , they undoubtedly went far astray ( from the Truth ) .
Indeed those who have disbelieved ( by denying Allahs witness ) and done injustice ( by denying the Messengers glory ) , Allah will by no means forgive them , nor will show them any path ( on the Day of Judgment ) .
Except the path of Hell wherein they shall dwell beyond the count of time and that is easy for Allah .
O mankind ! Indeed this Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) has come to you with the Truth from your Lord . So believe ( in him ) for your own good . But if you disbelieve ( i . e . deny his Prophethood then bear in mind that He is Beyond Any Need of you because ) whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah indeed . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
O People of the Book ! Exceed not the limits in your Din ( Religion ) and speak nothing but the truth about Allahs glory . The fact is simple that the Messiah , Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , is Allahs Messenger and His Word which He conveyed to Maryam ( Mary ) and a Spirit from Him . So believe in Allah and His Messengers and do not say : There are three ( Gods ) . Refrain ( from this belief ) ; ( that ) is best for you . Verily , Allah is the Only One God , Holy is He , far above having a son . Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) belongs to Him alone . And Sufficient is Allah as Guardian .
The Messiah feels no embarrassment in being a servant of Allah . Nor do the closest angels ( ever feel ashamed ) . And whoever disdains to be His servant and perpetrates arrogance , He will soon assemble together all such people before Him .
So those who believe and persist in doing pious deeds He will pay them their wages in full and will ( then ) award them more out of His Bounty . But those who disdain ( worshipping Allah ) and behave arrogantly , He will punish them with grievous torment , and they will not find for them any friend or helper besides Allah .
O mankind ! ( The most vital , perfect , clear and ) a conclusive evidence has reached you from your ( Ever - Glorious and Most Exalted ) Lord ( in the form of the Holy Being of the Prophet Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . And ( besides ) We have ( also ) sent down to you the brightening and radiant light ( in the shape of the Holy Quran ) .
So , those who believe in Allah and hold fast to His ( embrace , Allah ) will soon admit them to His ( exceptional ) Mercy and Grace and will show them the straight path to ( reach ) Him .
They seek edict ( i . e . judgment under Islamic Law ) from you . Say : Allah ordains pertaining to ( the inheritance of ) kalala ( the deceased leaving neither children nor parents behind ) : If a man dies childless but has one sister , she shall have ( as her share ) half ( the property ) that he leaves . ( If , on the contrary , a sister is kalala , then in the case of her death ) the brother will be ( the sole ) heir ( to his sister ) , if she has no children . Then if ( after a kalala brothers death ) two ( sisters ) are ( the heirs ) , they are entitled to share two - thirds of ( the property ) he leaves . And if ( in the case of the deceased who is kalala ) he has some brothers and sisters , male ( as well as ) female heirs , then the share of each male shall be as much as the ( portion of ) two females . Allah is clearly explaining to you ( these laws ) lest you should go astray . And Allah knows everything well .
O Believers ! Fulfil ( your ) promises . The quadrupeds ( i . e . cattle ) have been made lawful for you except those ( animals ) that will be announced to you afterwards . ( But ) when clad in Ihram ( the Pilgrims sacred dress ) , do not presume hunting lawful . Surely Allah ordains what He wills .
O Believers ! Do not denigrate the Signs of Allah , nor the sacred ( and venerable ) month ( i . e . anyone of Dhul - Qada , Dhul - Hijja , Muharram and Rajab ) , nor the sacrificial animals sent to the Sacred House the Kaba and nor the animals brought to Makka with ritual straps around their necks . Also do not violate the sanctity of ( life and property , and honour and dignity of ) those resorting to the Sacred House the Kaba , ( for they are the ones ) seeking bounty and pleasure of their Lord . And when you take off Ihram ( the Pilgrims garb ) , then you are allowed to hunt . And never let the enmity of a people incite you to aggression ( against them ) since they barred you from the Sacred House ( i . e . visiting the Kaba ) . And always support one another in ( the works of ) righteousness and piety but do not become accomplices in ( works of ) sin and transgression . And fear Allah persistently . Indeed Allah awards severe punishment ( to those who disobey and defy ) .
Forbidden to you is carrion ( the animal that dies and is not slaughtered according to Islamic Law ) and ( the discharged ) blood and pork and that ( animal ) on which the name of someone other than Allah has been invoked while slaughtering , and ( the animal ) that dies by strangling or by a violent blow ( not by any sharp instrument ) or by falling from a height or the one that has been gored to death or which has been ripped apart and gnawed by a wild beast , save the one which you slaughter ( before it dies ) , and ( that animal too is forbidden ) which has been slaughtered on idolatrous altars ( dedicated to false gods ) . And this ( is also unlawful ) that you learn your fortune through raffling ( with arrows or divide shares by such means ) . All these works are sins .
This day the disbelievers have lost all hopes of ( their heinous designs because ) your Din ( [ Religion ] has prevailed ) . So , ( O Believers , ) fear them not and always fear Me alone .
Today I have perfected your Din ( Religion ) for you , and have completed My Blessing upon you , and have chosen for you Islam ( as ) Din ( a complete code of life ) . Then if one gets into a survival situation ( forced by ) ravenous hunger ( and intense thirst i . e . driven by dire necessity , provided ) he is not prone to sinning ( i . e . eats what is forbidden without being wilfully inclined to sin ) , then Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
People ask you what has been made lawful for them . Say ( to them ) : The pure provisions are declared lawful for you . And the hunting animals that you have tamed running after game and , this way , teach them ( the methods of hunting ) which Allah has taught you ; so eat ( also ) of that ( prey ) which the hunting animals hold on for you ( after hunting ) . And pronounce the Name of Allah over that ( hunting beast when you unleash it for hunting ) . And keep fearing Allah . Indeed Allah is Swift in calling to account .
This day good and pure things have been made lawful for you . And the sacrificed animal of those given the ( Revealed ) Book is ( also ) lawful for you , while your sacrificed animal is lawful for them . And ( likewise ) chaste Muslim women as well as chaste women from amongst those given the Book before you ( are lawful for you ) when you have paid them their dower , ( provided ) you marry them for a conjugal life ( adhering to chasteness and decency ) and not for open lasciviousness ( merely satisfying your lust ) , nor for secret love affairs . The one who denies faith ( in the Commandments of Allah ) , all his work is ruined and he will ( also ) be among the losers in the Hereafter .
O Believers ! When ( you intend ) to stand for Prayer then ( for ablution ) wash your faces and hands up to the elbows , and pass your wet hands over your heads and ( also wash ) your feet up to the ankles . And if you are in a state of obligation for total ablution , purify yourselves well ( by bathing ) . Should you be ill or on a journey , or someone of you comes ( after ) defecation , or you have had sexual contact ( intercourse ) with women and then you do not find water , ( in these cases , ) perform tayammum with clean soil . So , it is wiping your faces and ( full ) hands with it ( i . e . clean soil ) . Allah does not want to make things anyway hard for you , but He wants to purify you , and complete the bestowal of His Favour upon you so that you may become grateful .
And call to mind the Favour of Allah ( conferred ) upon you , and ( also recall ) the promise which He took from you ( under affirmation ) when you declared ( agreeing ) : We heard ( Allahs Command ) and we obeyed ( it ) . And always fear Allah . Verily Allah knows best ( the secrets of ) hearts .
O Believers ! Holding fast to the cause of Allah , bear witness based on justice . And let not ( even ) the extreme hostility against a people provoke you into abstaining from justice ( in their case ) . Always do justice , ( for ) it is akin to piousness . And fear Allah . Indeed Allah is Well Aware of your works .
Allah has promised forgiveness and a mighty reward for those who believe and persist in piety and righteous actions .
But those who disbelieve and deny Our Revelations , they are the people who will be ( on fire ) in Hell .
O Believers ! Call to mind ( that ) Favour of Allah ( which ) was bestowed upon you when a people ( who disbelieved ) resolved to stretch out their hands against you ( for killing and destruction ) but Allah held back their hands from you . And always fear Allah ; and the believers must always rely on Allah alone .
And indeed Allah took a firm promise from the Children of Israel and We appointed among them twelve chieftains ( for its fulfilment , enforcement and protection ) . And Allah said ( to the Children of Israel ) : I am with you ( i . e . My special support and reinforcement will escort you ) . If you establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) consistently , and ( always ) adhere to believing in My Messengers , and furnish persistent support to their ( Prophetic Mission ) , and lend Allah a handsome loan ( for financing , promotion and prevalence of His Din [ Religion ] ) , I will certainly remove your sins from you , and will assuredly admit you to the Gardens with streams flowing beneath . Then , later , whoever from among you rejects faith ( i . e . violates the promise ) indeed strays from the straight path .
Then We laid Our curse on them because of their breach of promise ( i . e . they were deprived of Our Mercy ) , and We made their hearts callous ( i . e . they were deprived of guidance and susceptibility . So , ) they change the Words ( of Allahs Book ) from their ( right ) places and have forgotten a ( major ) portion of that ( guidance ) which they were urged upon . And you will continue being informed about one or the other of their treachery , except a few of them ( who have embraced faith ) . So pardon them and forbear . Indeed Allah loves the benefactors .
And We ( also ) took a ( similar ) promise from those who say : We are Christians . Then , they ( too ) forgot a ( major ) portion of that ( guidance ) which they were urged upon . So , ( owing to this breach of promise , ) We infected them with mutual hostility and spite till the Day of Resurrection . And Allah will soon unveil to them ( the reality of the acts ) which they used to perpetrate .
O People of the Book ! Indeed there has come to you Our Messenger who unfolds to you ( clearly ) many such things from the Book as you have been concealing and who overlooks many of ( your ) wrongs ( too ) . There has indeed come to you a light from Allah ( i . e . Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and an Enlightening Book ( i . e . the Holy Quran ) .
By this Allah guides those who seek His pleasure to the paths to peace ( and security ) , and takes them out of darkness ( of ignorance and disbelief ) by His Command , and leads them to the light ( of faith and guidance ) and directs them towards the straight road .
They have indeed committed disbelief who say : Verily , Allah is ( but ) the Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) . Say : Who is then ( the one ) who can possess a bit ( of the will ) of Allah . If He should so decide as to destroy Messiah son of Maryam and his mother and all that are on earth , ( who can save them against His will ) ? And the sovereignty of the heavens , the earth and ( the universe ) that exists between them , ( all ) belongs to Allah alone . He creates what He wills and Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
And the Jews and the Christians say : We are the sons of Allah and His beloved ones . Say : ( If your statement is correct ) then why does He punish you for your sins ? Rather ( the truth is that ) of all ( the Creation ) Allah has brought into being , you ( too ) are ( but ) a human being ( i . e . just like other human species ) . He forgives whom He pleases and chastises whom He wills . And the sovereignty of the heavens , the earth and ( the universe ) that exists between them ( all ) belongs to Allah alone and to Him ( everyone ) has to return .
O People of the Book ! Indeed Our ( Last ) Prophet has come to you ( at the juncture ) when ( the chain of ) Messengers succession is breaking off , and he expounds to you ( Our Commands and Injunctions ) with ample clarity , ( because ) you may ( by way of excuse ) say : There has come to us no Bearer of good news or a Warner . ( Now this excuse of yours has also lost ground because ) undoubtedly ( the Final ) Bearer of glad tidings and Warner has come to you , and Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
And ( recall the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : O my people ! Recollect the blessing Allah ( bestowed ) upon you when He raised Prophets from amongst you and made you kings and gave ( so ) much to you which He had not given to anyone else in all the worlds ( in your contemporary period ) .
O my people ! Enter the holy land ( of Syria or Bait al - Maqdis [ Jerusalem ] ) which Allah has decreed for you , and do not turn back ( in retreat ) or you will turn back as losers .
They said ( in reply ) : O Musa ( Moses ) ! There are mighty ( tyrant ) people ( living ) therein , and we shall never enter this ( land ) until they quit it . So , if they depart from here then we will certainly enter it .
Two men from among ( a few ) who feared ( Allah ) and whom Allah had favoured with His Blessing ( said to their folk : ) Enter the gate ( of the city invading ) these people ( dauntlessly ) . Once you enter this ( gate ) , you will certainly be victorious . And put your trust in Allah alone provided you are people of faith .
They said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! Never shall we enter this ( land ) so long as they are in it . So you ( along with ) your Lord go and fight ( against them ) ; we are sitting right here .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) submitted : My Lord ! I have no control ( over anyone ) except for myself and my brother ( Harun [ Aaron ] ) . So put us apart from ( these ) wicked people ( by Your Command ) .
( The Lord ) said : So this ( land ) is forbidden to these ( rebels ) for forty years . ( Anguished , ) they will keep wandering around the earth distractedly . So you will not grieve , ( O Musa , [ Moses ] ) over the ( warning plight ) of these disobedient and unruly people .
( O Most Esteemed Messenger ! ) Relate to these people the account of two sons of Adam ( Habil and Qabil [ Abel and Cain ] ) which is absolutely true . When both of them made offering ( one each to Allah ) , the offering from one of them ( Habil [ Abel ] ) was accepted while that from the other ( Qabil [ Cain ] ) was not accepted . Thereupon , he ( Qabil [ Cain ] ) said to Habil ( Abel out of jealousy and vengeance ) : I will surely kill you . He ( Habil [ Abel ] ) said ( in reply ) : Indeed , Allah accepts ( offering ) only from the self - protecting .
If you stretch forth your hand against me to kill me , ( even then ) I shall not stretch out my hand against you in order to kill you because I fear Allah , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
I want ( I commit no offence and ) you take my sin ( i . e . sin of killing me ) , and also your own sin ( the preceding one on account of which your offering has been rejected all ) on you . You will then become one of the inmates of Hell . And that is but the punishment of the wrongdoers .
Then the ( ill - commanding ) self of Qabil ( Cain ) made the killing of his brother Habil ( Abel ) easy ( and tempting ) for him . So , he killed him and became one of the losers .
Then Allah sent a crow that started scratching the earth to show him how to hide his brothers corpse . ( Seeing this , ) he said : Alas ! Could I not become even the like of this crow that I might hide the corpse of my brother ! So he became one of the remorseful people .
On account of this We prescribed ( this Commandment in the Torah sent down ) to the Children of Israel that whoever killed a person ( unjustly ) , except as a punishment for murder or for ( spreading ) disorder in the land ( i . e . punishment for bloodshed and robbery etc . ) , it would be as if he killed all the people ( of society ) ; and whoever ( saved him from unjust murder and ) made him survive , it would be as if he saved the lives of all the people ( of society ; i . e . he rescued the collective system of human life ) . And indeed Our Messengers came to them with evident Signs . Yet , even after that , the majority from among these people are certainly those who commit excesses in the land .
Indeed those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and remain engaged in creating mischief in the land ( i . e . perpetrate terrorism , robbery and burglary among the Muslims ) , their punishment is that they be slain , or hanged to death , or their hands and their feet on opposite sides be cut off , or they be exiled far from ( i . e . deprived of moving about in ) the homeland ( i . e . either by banishment or by imprisonment ) . That is the humiliation for them in this world , and for them there is a terrible torment in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
Except those who turn to Allah in repentance before you overpower them . So , know that Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Fear Allah persistently and keep looking for means to ( approach and get closer to ) Him and strive hard in His way so that you may prosper .
Assuredly those who disbelieve , if they possess all ( the riches and treasures ) that exist in the earth , and even with it as much more so that they may offer it as ransom ( a recompense for their souls to redeem themselves ) from the torment of the Day of Resurrection , ( all that too ) will not be accepted from them and there is a torturous punishment for them .
They will desire to get out of Hell ( somehow ) , whereas they will not be able to get out of it . And their torment will be eternal .
( After proper judicial trial as per law ) cut off the hands of both the man as well as the woman who steal , in retribution of ( the offence ) which they have committed , a deterring punishment from Allah . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Then the one who repents after ( this ) wrong and mends his ways , Allah surely turns towards him in Mercy . Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O man ! ) Do you not know that ( the Absolute ) Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone ? He torments whom He wills and forgives whom He pleases and Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
O Messenger ! Those , who ( advance ) fast into disbelief , should not grieve you . ( Firstly ) they include those ( hypocrites ) who utter from their mouth : We believe , while their hearts have not accepted faith . ( Secondly ) among them are the Jews . They listen to ( you ) eagerly to fabricate lies . They ( in fact ) hear ( to spy ) for others who have not ( yet ) come to you . ( They are the people ) who change the Words ( of Allah even ) after their contexts ( are fixed and ) say : If you are given this ( command which they like ) , take it , and if you are not given this ( command ) , then keep off ( it ) . And if Allah adjudges someone to go astray then you do not have any power for him ( to hold up the Command of ) Allah . They are the ones whose hearts Allah has no intention whatsoever to purify . For them there is ignominy ( of disbelief ) in this world and mighty punishment in the Hereafter .
( They ) are the ones who spy to coin lies . ( Moreover , ) they voraciously devour unlawful wealth and property . If they approach you ( with a dispute for judgment ) then it is ( up to ) you whether to judge between them or decline . And if you opt to keep away from them ( even then ) they are incapable of doing you any harm but if you judge , then judge between them ( too but ) with justice ( i . e . their enmity should not restrain judgment based on justice ) . Undoubtedly , Allah loves those who do justice .
And how can they accept you as a judge while they have the Torah with them wherein is ( revealed ) the Commandment of Allah ? Yet they turn away ( from the Truth even ) after that . And they are the ones who will not ( at all ) embrace faith .
Indeed , We revealed the Torah wherein was guidance and light . In accordance with that the Messengers who were the obedient ( servants of Allah ) used to give orders to the Jews . And the divines ( i . e . their spiritual masters ) and the rabbis ( also judged in accordance with that ) because they were assigned to safeguard the Book of Allah and they were the guardians of ( and witness to ) it . So do not fear people ( in establishing Din [ Religion ] and enforcing Allahs Commandments ) , and always fear Me ( alone ) , and do not barter My Signs ( Commands ) for a paltry price ( of this world ) . And he who does not judge ( and rule ) according to the Injunctions sent down by Allah , it is they who are disbelievers .
In that ( the Torah ) We had prescribed for them : A life for a life , an eye for an eye , a nose for a nose , an ear for an ear , and a tooth for a tooth and in the case of injuries ( too ) there is a requital . But the person who ( foregoes ) this ( requital ) by way of charity , this will serve as an atonement for his ( sins ) . And he who does not judge ( and rule ) in compliance with the Commandments sent down by Allah , it is they who are the transgressors .
And following in the footsteps of these ( Messengers ) We sent Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) confirming the Book ( the Torah ) revealed before him . And We gave him the Injil ( the Gospel ) which contained guidance and light , and ( the Injil [ the Gospel ] too ) confirmed the ( Book ) Torah that preceded it . And it was ( an absolute ) guidance and admonition for the Godfearing .
And the people of the Injil ( [ the Gospel ] too ) are required to judge in accordance with that ( Commandment ) which Allah has sent down in it . And he who does not judge ( and run the state ) complying with the commandments Allah has revealed , it is they who are unruly and wicked .
And , ( O Most Esteemed Messenger , ) We have revealed the Book to you ( also ) with the Truth which confirms the Book that preceded it and stands as a guardian over ( the actual commands and contents contained in ) it . So judge between them according to these ( Commandments ) which Allah has revealed . And do not follow their desires turning away from the Truth that has come to you . We have designed for each one of you a discrete law and an all - embracing way of life . Had Allah so willed , He would have made you all one Umma ( [ Community ] agreeing to the same law ) . But He wants to test you in these ( separately given sets of Commandments ) which He has given you ( suiting your respective life situations ) . So , make haste in doing pious works . To Allah have you all to return . He will then enlighten you on ( the Truth and falsehood in all the matters ) in which you used to disagree .
And , ( O Beloved , We have enjoined that ) you should judge between them by this ( Commandment ) which Allah has revealed and do not follow their desires . And be on your guard against them lest they tempt you away from any of ( the commandments ) which Allah has revealed to you . But if they turn away ( from your judgment ) then know that Allah intends to punish them for some of their sins . And most of the people are unruly and disobedient .
Do they seek the law of ( the days of ) ignorance ? And who is better than Allah in ( giving ) judgment for a people who have firm faith ?
O Believers ! Do not make friends with the Jews and the Christians . They ( all ) are friends to one another ( against you ) . And whoever of you makes friends with them will ( also ) become one of them . Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
So you will see those whose hearts are diseased ( with hypocrisy and minds infected with slavery ) that they run to ( join the Jews and the Christians and ) say : We fear lest the wheel of fate turns against us ( i . e . it is likely to get under the security umbrella by allying with them ) . But it is not far from possible that Allah ( really ) blesses ( the Muslims ) with victory or may ( send ) from His side a decree ( as a sign of success and victory ) . Then they will feel ashamed of ( the hypocritical thinking ) they have concealed in their hearts .
And ( at that time ) the believers will say : Is it they who swore by Allah ( by way of ) solemn oaths that they were certainly with you ( alone ) ? ( But ) all their deeds have gone void . So they have become the losers .
O Believers ! Whoever of you turns away from his Din ( Religion ) , Allah will soon bring ( in their place ) a people He will ( Himself ) love and who will love Him . They will be kind ( and humble ) towards the believers ( but ) strict ( and firm ) towards the disbelievers . They will toil ( very hard ) in the way of Allah and will never fear any reproaches of the reprovers . This ( revolutionary character ) is the Grace of Allah which He grants whom He wills , and Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
Indeed your ( helper ) friend is only Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers ( as well ) who persevere in offering Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and they are those who prostrate themselves ( with extreme submissiveness before the Presence of Allah ) .
And the one who makes friends with Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers then ( they are the people who are Allahs party ) , and ( it is the people of ) Allahs party who will surely overmaster .
O Believers ! Do not take those for friends who have made fun and sport of your Din ( Religion ) from among those who were given the Book before you and the disbelievers . And fear Allah persistently if you are ( truly ) the men of faith .
And when you call ( the people ) to Prayer ( by means of the Adhan the call to Prayer ) , these ( people ) take it as fun and sport because they are a people who have no sense ( at all ) .
( O Esteemed Messenger ! ) Say : O People of the Book ! What has made you cynic about us except that we believe in Allah and this ( Book ) which has been revealed to us and those ( Books ) which have been sent down before it ? And surely the majority of you are defiant and disobedient .
Say : Shall I apprise you of him who , in the matter of punishment , is worse in the sight of Allah than ( the one you regard the most despised ? And it is he ) whom Allah has cursed , whom He has shown His wrath , and He has transformed ( some ) of these ( evil people ) into apes and ( others into ) swines ; and ( he is such a person ) as has ( obeyed and ) worshipped Satan . They are the people who are the most wretched as for their dwelling , and far more astray from the straight path .
And when those ( hypocrites ) come to you , they say : We have believed , while they entered ( your company ) with disbelief and left with the same ( disbelief ) . And Allah knows best ( the matters ) which they carry hidden .
And you will see the majority of them hurrying towards sins and excesses and eagerly devouring what is forbidden ( and unlawful ) . Most evil indeed is all that they are doing .
Why do the divines ( spiritual masters ) and rabbis abstain from forbidding them from their sinful speech and eating unlawful things ? Certainly what all they are contriving ( by abstaining from raising voices against evil ) is most heinous .
And the Jews say : Allahs hand is tied up ( as if God forbid ! He is niggardly ) . Tied up be their ( own ) hands and they have been cursed for what they have uttered ! ( The truth is that ) both His hands are stretched out wide open ( in showering His bounties and blessings ) . He spends ( i . e . bestows His blessings on His servants ) as He desires . And , ( O Beloved , ) the ( Book ) which has been revealed to you from your Lord will certainly bolster up most of them in rebellion and disbelief ( due to jealousy ) . And We have put among them hostility and spite till the Day of Resurrection . Whenever these people kindle the fire of war , Allah puts it out . And they are engaged in spreading mischief and disorder ( everywhere ) on the earth and Allah does not like those who spread mischief .
And if the People of the Book had believed ( in Muhammad , the Messenger , [ blessing and peace be upon him ] ) and adopted Godwariness , We would have removed all their sins ( from their record ) , and would surely have admitted them to the blissful Gardens .
And had they established ( their systems by enforcing ) the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) and whatever ( more ) was sent down to them from their Lord , they would have ( been provided with the material resources so abundantly that they would have ) received sustenance from above and from beneath their feet ( as well , but the sustenance would never have exhausted ) . A section among them are moderate ( i . e . they like the middle way ) , but what most of them are doing is extreme wickedness .
O ( Esteemed ) Messenger ! Communicate ( to the people all ) that has been revealed to you from your Lord . And if you did not do ( so ) then you would not deliver the Message of the Lord . And Allah will ( Himself ) protect your ( life ) from the ( hostile ) people . Surely Allah does not show the path of guidance to those who disbelieve .
Say : O People of the Book , you are nowhere ( on the path of Din [ Religion ] ) until you establish ( the system by enforcing ) the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) and whatever has been sent down to you from your Lord . And , ( O Beloved , ) the Book which has been sent down to you from your Lord will certainly provoke rebellion and disbelief among most of them ( because of jealousy ) . So do not grieve over ( the state of affairs of ) the disbelievers .
Indeed ( those who call themselves ) the Muslims , the Jews , the Sabeans ( worshippers of stars ) and the Christians , all who believe ( true - heartedly in accordance with the teachings of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) in Allah and the Last Day , and practise piety steadfastly shall have neither any fear nor grief .
Surely We took promise from the Children of Israel ( too ) and ( also ) sent ( many ) Messengers towards them ( but ) every time a Messenger brought to them a commandment which their ( ill - commanding ) selves disliked , they belied a party ( of the Messengers ) and slew the other ( in succession ) .
And ( besides ) they held the view that ( killing or belying the Messengers ) would not result into any torment . So they became blind and deaf . Allah , then , accepted their repentance . But most of them ( again ) turned blind and deaf ( i . e . incapable of perceiving the truth by seeing and hearing ) . And Allah is Ever Watchful of what they are doing .
In fact they have become disbelievers who say : Allah is the Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) , whereas the Messiah ( himself ) said : O Children of Israel ! Worship Allah Who is my ( as well as ) your Lord . Indeed Allah has forbidden Paradise to him who associates partners with Him . And Hell is his abode and the wrongdoers will not find any helpers .
Certainly they ( also ) become disbelievers who say : Allah is the third of the three ( Gods ) , whereas there is none worthy of worship except the One God . If they do not desist from ( the absurdity ) which they utter , a grievous punishment will surely torment those of them who disbelieve .
Will they not turn towards Allah ( in repentance ) and beg forgiveness from Him ? For Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
The Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) , is ( nothing ) but a Messenger ( neither a god nor a son of God , and nor His partner ) . Many Messengers have indeed preceded him and his mother was a paragon of truth ( saintly person ) . Both ( were mortal creatures as they ) used to eat food . ( O Beloved ! ) Observe how clearly We explain the Revelations for their ( guidance ) but again observe how ( in spite of that ) they are turning away ( from the Truth ) .
Say : Do you worship besides Allah someone that has no power to do you any harm or good ? Allah is the One Who is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Say : O People of the Book ! Do not unjustly exceed limits in your Din ( Religion ) , nor follow the desires of those who lost the straight path ( before Muhammads Prophethood [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and ( also ) caused a number of ( others ) to go astray and remained deviated from the straight road ( even after Muhammads Prophethood [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
Those among the Children of Israel who disbelieved were cursed by the tongue of Dawud ( David ) and Isa , son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) . That is because they disobeyed and transgressed .
( And they were cursed also because ) they would not prevent one another from the evil deeds they used to do . Evil certainly were the deeds that they used to do .
You will see most of them befriending the disbelievers . How evil that is which they have sent forward for their ( accountability on the Last Day ) and ( that is ) that Allah is ( highly ) displeased with them and they will suffer from the torment forever !
And had they believed in Allah and the ( Last ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the ( Book ) that has been revealed to him , they would not have made friends with those ( enemies of Islam ) . But most of them are disobedient .
You will indeed find the Jews and the polytheists the bitterest of people in their enmity against the Muslims , and the closest in love and affection for the Muslims you will find those who say : Indeed we are Nazarenes ( Christians ) . This is because among them are savants ( i . e . scholars of Sharia ) as well as monks ( i . e . ascetic worshippers ) and ( moreover ) they are not given to arrogance .
And ( that is the reason ) when ( some of the true Christians ) listen to this ( Holy Quran ) which has been revealed to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , you see their eyes overflowing with tears . ( This overflowing of tears ) springs from the Truth of which they have ( gained ) gnosis . ( Besides ) they submit : O our Lord ! We have believed ( in the Truth which You have revealed ) , so inscribe us ( also ) among those who bear witness ( to the Truth ) .
And what is the matter with us that we should not believe in Allah and the Truth ( i . e . Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and the Holy Quran ) which has come to us , while we ( too ) cherish ( this ) strong ambition that our Lord admit us ( to His Mercy and Paradise ) along with the most pious ?
So Allah rewarded them with Gardens , with streams flowing under them , in recompense of the submission they made ( like a true believer . They ) will live there forever and that is the wage of the righteous .
But those who disbelieve and belie Our Revelations , it is they who are ( the inmates ) of Hell .
O Believers ! Do not make ( for yourselves ) unlawful those pure things which Allah has made lawful for you and do not exceed limits either . Indeed Allah does not like those who transgress the prescribed bounds .
And eat of the pure and lawful things which Allah has provided for you with and always fear Allah Whom you believe in .
Allah does not persecute you for your purposeless ( and frivolous ) oaths , but takes you to task for your ( solemn ) oaths which you affirm ( deliberately ) . ( If you breach such oaths ) the atonement is feeding ten poor persons with an average ( quality ) food which you serve to your family , or providing them ( i . e . the poor ) with the clothes , or freeing one neck ( a slave or slave girl ) . But the one who does not find ( all this ) shall fast for three days . This is the atonement for your oaths which you affirm ( and then break ) . So , always guard your oaths . It is this way Allah explains most clearly His Revelations to you so that you may become grateful ( by obeying His Commandments ) .
O Believers ! Wine and gambling and idols mounted ( for worship ) and divining arrows ( for seeking luck , all ) are filthy works of Satan . So turn away from them ( completely ) so that you may prosper .
Satan seeks only to breed enmity and spite among you by means of wine and gambling and hinder you from remembering Allah and observing Prayer . Will you abstain ( from these evil - generating temptations ) ?
And obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and be on your guard ( against opposition to Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . But if you turn away , then you should know that the responsibility of Our Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is only to deliver ( the commandments ) clearly ( and he has accomplished this duty . )
There is no sin on those who believe and do righteous deeds with regard to what they have eaten ( of the unlawful things before the Command of Prohibitions came ) , whereas ( in all other matters ) they were Godwary and put firm faith ( in other Commandments of Allah ) , and practised pious deeds consistently . Later , ( also after the Revelation of the Prohibitions , ) they desisted from ( all the unlawful things ) and believed ( true - heartedly in their unlawfulness ) , became men of piety and God - wariness and ( finally ) rose to the station of men of Spiritual Excellence ( i . e . Allahs beloved , favourite , intimate and righteous servants ) . And Allah loves those who live with spiritual excellence .
O Believers ! Allah will certainly test you by means of ( some ) game animals your hands and your lances can reach so that Allah makes him identifiable who fears Him in secret . Then whoever transgresses ( even ) after that , for him is painful chastisement .
O Believers ! Do not kill game while you are in Pilgrim attire ( Ihram ) . Whoever of you ( Pilgrim - clad ) kills it intentionally will recompense ( it ) in kind of cattle equivalent to the one he has killed . In this regard , two men of probity out of you are to judge ( whether this animal is really the games equal , provided ) that offering is to be brought to the Kaba . Or its atonement is feeding a few indigent persons ( i . e . usual food for the number of poor people manageable in the animals cost ) , or fasting corresponding to that ( number of days manageable within the same food meant for the poor , ) so that he tastes the ( gravity ) of his offence . Allah has forgiven whatever has bygone earlier ( to it ) , but whoever repeats ( a similar act ) Allah will avenge ( his defiance ) . And Allah is Mighty , the Lord of Retribution .
The game of the sea and its eating has been made lawful for your and the travellers benefit , but the game of the land has been prohibited for you so long as you are in the Pilgrim dress ( Ihram ) . And always fear Allah towards Whose ( Presence ) you ( all ) will be assembled .
Allah has made the Kaba , the sacred ( and venerable ) House , a means to keep ( peace in the spiritual and worldly matters of ) the people . And also the Sacred Month , the animals of offerings to the Holy Kaba and the animals with collars symbolic of sacrifice around their necks ( brought into the sacred confines of Makka , all have been granted sanctity and veneration by virtue of the same affinity ) ; that is to make you know that Allah has best knowledge of whatever there is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and Allah is Well - Aware of everything .
Know that Allah is Severe in Punishment and that Allah is Most Forgiving and Ever - Merciful ( as well ) .
The Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] has ( no other responsibility ) but to communicate ( the Revealed Commands with absolute perfection ) . And Allah knows ( all ) that you make known and that you hide .
Say : ( Both ) the pure and the impure can never be alike , ( O listener , ) even though the abundance of the polluted and foul ( objects ) may fascinate you . So , ( instead of monitoring the difference of abundance and scarcity ) fear Allah , O men of wisdom , so that you may flourish and prosper .
O Believers ! Do not ask about things ( on which the Quran is quiet , ) for if they are disclosed to you , they may put you in strain ( and you will be disgusted by them ) . But if you enquire about them while the Quran is being sent down , they will be disclosed to you ( i . e . fixated through revealing the Commandments , but this will put an end to your choice of discretion , binding you only to one Command ) . Allah has ( so far ) overlooked ( these matters and questions ) , and Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Forbearing .
No doubt a people before you asked about similar things but ( when they were disclosed to them ) they denied them .
Allah has not made ( lawful in the Sharia a cattle dedicated to idols ) , such as a Bahira , a Saiba , a Wasila or a Ham . But the disbelievers fabricate lies against Allah and most of them do not have sense .
And when it is said to them : Turn towards this ( Quran ) revealed by Allah and towards the ( most venerable ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , they say : Sufficient for us is ( the way ) on which we found our fathers , though their fathers did not have any knowledge ( of Din [ Religion ] ) , nor were they rightly guided .
O Believers ! Take care of your own selves . No one who goes astray can do you harm provided you have become rightly guided . All of you have to return to Allah alone . He will then apprise you of ( the works ) that you used to do .
O Believers ! When death approaches anyone of you , then at the time of making a bequest there should be two men of probity from amongst you ( for ) taking testimony or ( any ) two men from among others if you are travelling in the land . If ( in the meanwhile ) the agony of death overtakes you , detain both of them after Prayer . If you suspect ( them ) they shall both swear by Allah : We shall not sell it for any price , even though one is a ( very close ) relative , nor shall we conceal the testimony ( ordained ) by Allah . ( If we hide it , ) we shall be among sinners there and then .
But if it is learnt later that both of them have earned sin ( owing to concealing the true witness ) , then , in their stead , two other ( witnesses ) should rise from among those whose right the two former ( witnesses ) have seized . ( Let them both be closer relatives of the deceased . ) They should then swear by Allah : Indeed our testimony is truer than the testimony of both of them ; we are not transgressing the bounds ( of Truth ) . ( If we do so ) we shall be among the wrongdoers there and then .
This ( method ) is closer to the mode of making people give their evidence true to facts , or they feel afraid that ( in the case of false testimony , ) following their oaths , ( equally solemn ) oaths will be turned ( towards nearer heirs ) . So fear Allah with perseverance and always listen ( to the Commandments of Allah attentively ) . And Allah does not guide the people who disobey and defy .
( Fear the Day ) when Allah will assemble all the Messengers and ask ( them ) : What response were you served ( by your respective Communities following your call for Din [ Religion ] ) ? They will ( submit their ) reply ( to their Lord ) : We have no knowledge . It is certainly You Who know all the unseen full well .
When Allah will say : O Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , call to mind My Favour to you and your mother when I provided you strength through the Holy Spirit ( Gabriel ) ; you conversed with the people ( in a uniform style both ) from the cradle ( during early childhood ) and in the ripe age ( while preaching as a Messenger ) ; and when I taught you the Book , and wisdom ( and insight ) and the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) ; and when by My Command you made out of clay some ( figure ) looking like a bird , then you would breathe into it and by My Command it would become a bird ; and when you made the born blind and the leper ( i . e . victims of leprosy ) convalesce by My Command ; and when you raised up the dead ( standing , bringing them back to life from the grave ) by My Command ; and when I held back the Children of Israel from ( killing ) you while you brought them clear Sings , those who disbelieved among them said : This is nothing but sheer magic .
And when I imbued the hearts of the disciples with ( this ) : Believe in Me and My Messenger ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) , they said : We believe and bear witness that we are certainly Muslims .
And ( also recall ) when the disciples said : Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , is it possible for your Lord to send down to us from heaven a table ( spread with food ) ? Isa ( Jesus ) said ( in reply ) : ( O people , ) fear Allah if you are illumined with faith .
They said : We seek ( only ) to eat of it so that our hearts are satiated and we know ( with added certitude ) that you have told us the Truth and we bear witness ( to the descent of the table ) .
Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) said : O Allah , our Lord , send down to us from heaven the table spread ( with bounties ) so that ( the day of its descent ) becomes ( Id ) Festival Day for us , and for our predecessors ( as well as ) successors , and that ( spread table ) comes as a Sign from You , and provide us with sustenance , and You are the Best Sustainer .
Allah said : I certainly send it down to you , but whoever of you disbelieves ( after that ) I shall punish him with a torment such as I will never inflict on anyone else in all the worlds .
And when Allah will say : O Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) ! Did you ask the people to take you and your mother as two gods besides Allah ? He will submit : Glory be to You ! It is not ( justified ) for me to say such a thing as I have no right to say . Had I said it You would surely have known it . You know every such ( thing ) that is in my heart , but I do not know those ( things ) which are in Your knowledge . It is only You indeed Who Know Well all that is unseen .
I said to them nothing except ( that ) which You ordered me to say : Worship ( only ) Allah Who is my Lord and your Lord ( too ) . And I kept a vigilant watch over ( their beliefs and actions ) so long as I was among them . But when You lifted me up then You alone watched over their ( affairs ) , and You are a Witness to everything .
If You torment them , they are only Your servants and if You forgive them , You are indeed Almighty , All - Wise .
Allah will say : This is the Day ( when ) the truth of the truthful will benefit them . There are Gardens for them with streams flowing beneath ; they shall live therein forever . Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him . This ( pleasure of Allah ) is the highest achievement .
To Allah belongs the kingdom of all the heavens and the earth and whatever lies in them , and He wields full power over everything .
All praise belongs to Allah alone Who created the heavens and the earth and produced darkness and light ; yet the disbelievers set up ( false gods as ) equals to their Lord .
( Allah ) is He Who created you from mud ( i . e . originated from it chemical genesis of human life on the planet Earth ) . Then He fixed a term ( for you to die ) . And with Him alone is the appointed time ( for holding the Day of Resurrection ) ; yet you doubt .
And He alone is Allah ( the True God to be worshipped ) in the heavens and the earth Who knows ( all ) your hidden and your open ( things ) . And He knows ( that too ) which you are earning .
And there comes to them no Sign of the Signs of their Lord but ( that ) they turn away from it .
Then indeed ( the same way ) they belied the Truth ( the Quran as well ) when it came to them ( as a Sign of Allah ) . But soon there is coming to them the news pertaining to what they have been making fun of .
Have they not seen how many a generation We eliminated before them whom We had given ( such an indomitable ) dominion ( and stronghold ) in the land as We have not given even to you ? And We sent upon them persistently falling rain and caused streams to flow beneath ( their dwellings and castles ) . Then , ( despite giving them such a luxurious life , ) We destroyed them because of their sins and raised other communities after them .
And had We revealed to you a book written on paper which these people could also have touched with their own hands , ( even ) then the disbelievers would have said : This is ( nothing ) but sheer magic .
And these ( disbelievers ) say : Why was an angel ( whom we could physically see and who would verify him ) not sent down to this ( Glorious Messenger ) ? Had We sent down an angel , ( their ) affair would have been settled once for all and they would not have been granted ( any ) respite .
And if We had made the Messenger an angel , even then We would have made him ( the form of ) a man , and ( even in that case , ) We would have put them in the same doubt which they are ( already ) in ( i . e . confused over his physical appearance , they would say : He is a human being like us . ) .
Indeed before you ( too ) the Messengers were laughed at , but then the same ( torment of the Truth ) which they ridiculed besieged those of them who ridiculed .
Say : Travel through the earth and see ( with a warned eye ) what has been the end of those who denied ( the Truth ) .
Ask ( them this question ) : To whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth ? And ( then ) proclaim ( this as well ) : Allahs it is . He has made Mercy incumbent upon Himself ( as a gracious obligation ) . He will gather you together on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt . Those who have brought ( eternal ) loss upon their souls will not believe .
And to Him belongs ( all the creation ) that reposes at night and during the day . And He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Say : Shall I take ( for worship ) anyone as ( my ) friend other than Allah , Who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth , and He feeds ( all ) and is not fed ( Himself ) ? Say : I have been commanded to become the first Muslim ( who bows his head before His Holy Presence ) and ( this too has been commanded , ) never to be one of the polytheists .
Say : Surely , I fear the Day of a mighty torment if I disobey my Lord . ( How is it possible ? )
He from whom that ( torment ) is averted that Day shall have been shown great Mercy ( by Allah ) . And it is this ( deliverance on the Last Day ) which is an evident success .
If Allah afflicts you with some suffering there is none who can remove it but He , and if He bestows some good upon you , then He wields full power over everything .
And He is the One Who is Dominant over His servants and He is All - Wise , All - Knowing .
Inquire ( of them ) : Who is the greatest to bear testimony ? Proclaim ( yourself ) : Allah is witness between you and me . This Holy Quran has been revealed to me so that with it I may warn you as well as every such person this ( Quran ) may reach . Do you really bear witness that there are ( also ) gods other than Allah ? Say : I do not bear witness ( to such a wrong thing ) . Reiterate : God is but He the Only One and I despise ( all ) these objects you associate ( with Allah ) .
Those to whom We have given the Book recognize this ( last of the Messengers ) as they recognize their sons . They are those who have brought ( eternal ) loss upon their souls , but they will not believe .
And who can be a greater wrongdoer than one who invents a lie against Allah or who belies His Revelations ? Surely the wrongdoers shall not prosper .
And the Day when We shall assemble them all together and ask those who used to associate partners with Us : Where are your partners you assumed ( to be your gods ) ?
Then they will be left with no other excuse except that they ( will ) say : By Allah , our Lord , we did not associate partners with Allah .
See how they lie against their own selves and the blame they used to fabricate ( in the world ) has vanished from them !
And among them are ( also ) some who keep their ears towards you and ( in view of their evil intentions ) We have wrapped their hearts in veils . ( So , it is not possible for them now ) that they may understand it ( the Quran ) and ( We have ) plugged their ears . And even if they see all Signs ( naked ) , they ( still ) will not believe in them , so much so that when they approach you and quarrel with you the disbelievers say ( at that time ) : This ( Quran ) is nothing but fabricated stories of the old folk .
And they hinder ( others from following ) this ( Messenger and the Quran ) and ( also themselves ) flee far away from it . They ruin but their own souls and have no awareness ( of this destruction at all ) .
If you see ( them at the time ) when they will be made to stand ( on the verge of ) the Fire they will say : Would that we were sent back ( to the world ) , then we would not ( at all ) belie the Signs of our Lord and would be of the believers !
( This affirmation contains no truth . ) In fact whatever they used to hide before ( all that ) has become visible to them . And ( even ) if they were sent back ( to the world ) they would ( once again ) do the same that they had been forbidden . And undoubtedly they are ( seasoned ) liars .
And they will keep saying ( what they said before ) : There is no other ( life ) except the life of this world , nor shall we be raised up ( after death ) .
If you see ( them at the time ) when they will be made to stand before their Lord and Allah will say ( to them ) : Is not this ( life ) a truth ? They will submit : Yes , of course , by our Lord ( it is the Truth ) . Allah will ( then ) say : So ( now ) taste the torment because you used to disbelieve .
So those who belie their meeting with Allah incur loss , so much so that when the Last Hour comes upon them all of a sudden they will say : Oh , woe to us ! We committed a ( serious ) blunder with regard to ( believing in ) this ( Day of Resurrection ) . And they will be carrying the burdens ( of their sins ) on their backs . Beware ! Most evil is that burden which they are bearing .
( The luxury ) of the worldly life is nothing but play and funfair , and certainly it is the home of the Hereafter which is better for the Godfearing . Do you not understand ( this reality ) ?
( O Beloved ! ) We assuredly know that ( what ) they say grieves you . So they are not denying you but ( in fact ) it is the Revelations of Allah that the wrongdoers are denying .
And indeed ( many ) Messengers were rejected before you ( as well ) , but they remained steadfast facing this rejection and persecution until Our help reached them . And there is none that can alter the Words ( promises ) of Allah . And surely the accounts of the Messengers have come to you ( for peace of heart ) .
And if their disinclination and turning away is distressing you ( and you ardently desire them to believe in any case ) then , if possible , manage a tunnel , ( going down ) into the earth , or seek some ladder , ( climbing up ) to heaven , and bring them some ( exceptional ) Sign ( to show them , even then they will not believe ) . And if Allah so willed , He would indeed assemble them together on guidance . So ( owing to the overwhelming enthusiasm generating from your compassion , kindness and concern ) be not unaware ( of their ill fortune ) .
The truth is that they alone accept ( the invitation of Truth ) who listen to it ( with truthful hearts ) . And Allah will raise the dead ( the deniers of the truth from the graves as disbelievers ) . Then , they will be returned to the same ( Lord Whom they used to deny ) .
And they said : Why has a ( permanent ) Sign not been sent down to this ( Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) from his Lord ? Say : Allah assuredly has the power to send down ( such a ) Sign but most of them do not know ( the secrets of His wisdom ) .
And , ( O mankind ! ) there is no moving ( animal ) on the earth nor a bird that flies on its two wings but ( such ) that they are species like you [ umamun amthalu - kum in several traits ] . We have not omitted anything ( which is not given symbolic or elaborate details ) in the Book . Then all ( the people ) shall be gathered before their Lord .
Those who reject Our Revelations are deaf and dumb , ( groping ) in the folds of darkness . Allah holds astray whom He wills ( due to his stubbornness and the denial of the Truth ) , and puts whom He pleases on the straight road ( due to the acceptance of the Truth ) .
Say ( to these disbelievers ) : Give your view : if Allahs torment befalls you or the Last Hour comes upon you , will you then call upon anyone other than Allah ( to escape the torment ? Reply ) if you are truthful .
( Nay , that is not possible at all . ) The truth is that it is ( Allah ) Whom you call upon ( even now ) . Then , if He wills He averts those ( hardships ) for which you call upon ( Him ) . ( At that time ) you forget those ( idols ) that you associate as partners ( with Allah ) .
Indeed We sent Messengers to many communities before you . Then We seized them with scarcity and distress ( due to their disobedience and defiance ) , so that they might beseech ( with submissiveness and humility ) .
Then why did they not humble themselves and wail and moan when Our torment came upon them ? But ( the fact is that ) their hearts became hardened and Satan made the ( sinful ) acts appear to them attractive and alluring that they used to perpetrate .
But when they forgot that Reminder which was urged upon them We opened up for them the gates ( to abundance ) of everything ( to take them to their end ) until when they luxuriated ( in ecstasy of sensual delights and sensuous gratification ) with all that was provided for them We seized them all of a sudden ( with torment ) and they were struck with despair .
So the root of the wrongdoing and unjust people was cut off . And all praise belongs to Allah alone Who is the Sustainer of all the worlds .
Say ( to them ) : What do you think if Allah deprives you of hearing and sight and seals up your hearts , ( then ) who is the god other than Allah who can restore to you these ( blessings afresh ) ? Look how diversely We explain Our Revelations . Yet they continue turning away .
( Also ) say ( to them ) : Tell me if the punishment of Allah comes upon you all of a sudden or openly , will ( any other ) be destroyed except those who do injustice ?
And We do not send Messengers but as Bearers of glad tidings and as Warners . So whoever believes and changes into a righteous person ( practically ) , they will have nothing to fear , nor will they grieve .
But those who belie Our Revelations , torment is bound to befall them because they used to disobey .
Say ( to these disbelievers ) : I do not say to you that I possess the treasures of Allah , nor do I know the unseen myself , and nor do I say to you that I am an angel . I follow only that ( Commandment ) which is revealed to me . Say : Can the blind and the seeing be equal ? So do you not ponder ?
And warn by means of this ( Quran ) those who fear that they will be assembled before their Lord while they are without ( any ) helper or intercessor apart from Him so that they may become pious .
And do not turn away these ( run - down and broken - hearted ) people ( from your company and close circle ) who call upon their Lord persistently seeking only His pleasure morning and evening . There is nothing ( obligatory ) either on you from their account ( of deeds and rewards ) or upon them from your account . Even then if you turned them away ( from your munificence and benevolence ) , you would be of those who deprive others of their rights ( which does not go with your glory ) .
And in this way We put to test some of them by means of some others so that these ( affluent disbelievers seeing the poor Muslims ) say ( mocking ) : Are these the ones from amongst us upon whom Allah has bestowed His Favours ? Does Allah not know best the grateful ?
And when those who believe in Our Revelations come to you , then say ( affectionately ) : Peace be upon you . Your Lord has made Mercy incumbent upon Himself ( as a gracious obligation ) . So whoever from amongst you commits some evil out of ignorance ( or suspension of discretion ) but later turns to ( Allah in ) repentance and amends ( himself ) , then surely He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And so do We elucidate in detail the Revelations ( and this is ) in order that the pattern of behaviour of the evildoers may become distinctly known ( to all ) .
Say : I am forbidden to worship those ( false gods ) that you worship apart from Allah . Say : I cannot follow your desires , for if I did I would certainly lose the right path . Nor shall I be one of the rightly guided ( which is impossible ) .
Say : ( O disbelievers ! ) Verily , I stand ( firm ) on the enlightening proof from my Lord and you treat it as false . I do not have that ( chastisement ) which you seek in haste . The command rests only with Allah . He relates the Truth and He is the Best Judge .
Say ( to them ) : Had I had that ( torment ) which you desire to have in haste then certainly the matter between me and you would have been settled once for all . And Allah knows the unjust full well .
With Him ( under His control and possession ) are the keys of the unseen ( i . e . the ways and means by which the unseen is disclosed to someone ) ; no one ( by ones own effort ) knows them but He . And He knows ( directly ) whatever is in the land and in the sea . And not a leaf falls but He knows it . There is not a grain in the folds of the earths darkness , nor anything green or dry but ( has been recorded ) in the enlightening Book .
And He is the One Who takes your souls by night and knows whatever you earn by day , and then wakes you up in the day , so that the appointed term ( of your life ) may be completed . Then to Him shall you return . Then ( on the Day of Reckoning ) He shall unfold to you ( all those actions ) which you used to do ( during this term of life ) .
And He has dominance over His servants and He sends to you ( angels as ) guardians until when death approaches anyone of you ( then the angels ) We send take his soul and they do not err ( or default ) .
Then they ( all ) will be returned to the Presence of Allah , their true Lord . Beware ! It is only His ( prerogative ) to decree . And He is the Quickest in taking the account .
Inquire of them : Who delivers you from the layers of the darkness of the land and the sea ? When ( in trouble , ) you supplicate Him totally prostrated and ( also ) in secret : If He delivers us from that ( adversity ) we shall surely be among the grateful .
Say : It is Allah Who rescues you from this ( adversity ) and every other distress . Yet you associate partners with Him .
Say : He has the power to send to you the torment ( may it be ) from above you or from underneath your feet , or engage you in strife by splitting you into sects and make you taste the violence of one against the other . See in what diverse ways We elucidate the Revelations , so that they may comprehend .
And your people have rejected this ( Quran ) as false whereas it is the Absolute Truth . Say : I am not a guardian over you .
Every news has a fixed time ( to occur ) and soon will you come to know .
When you see those who engage themselves in ( vain discourse and making a jest of ) Our Revelations keep away from them till they get busy with some other subject of conversation . But if Satan makes you forget ( it ) , then never ( ever ) sit with the unjust people after it strikes your mind .
And there is nothing ( obligatory ) upon the Godfearing from the account of these ( disbelievers ) , but they ( should ) admonish them so that they may be protected ( from disbelief and mocking the Quran ) .
And let them be forsaken who have made their own Din ( Religion ) a sport and pastime and who have been deceived by the worldly life . And continue to exhort them ( for their awareness ) by means of the ( Quran ) , so that no soul gets consigned to ruination as a result of its doings . ( Then ) will there be neither any helper nor any intercessor for him apart from Allah . And even if that ( soul ) atones ( for its sins ) full recompense ( i . e . ransom ) , that will not be accepted from it ( at all ) . It is they who are destroyed in consequence of their doings . For them is drinking of scalding water and a torturous torment because they used to reject faith .
Say : Should we worship besides Allah something that can neither bring us any profit nor do us any harm , and turn on our heels after Allah has blessed us with guidance , like the one satans have persuaded away from the right path into bewilderment in the land , whose companions are calling on him to the straight path : Come to us , ( but he can perceive nothing ) . Proclaim : The guidance of Allah is the only ( true ) guidance , and ( that is why ) we have been commanded to submit totally to the Lord of all the worlds .
And this ( has also been commanded : ) Establish Prayer and always fear Him , and Allah is He to Whom you ( all ) shall be gathered .
And He is the One ( Allah ) Who has created the heavens and the earth ( in accordance with the zero - defect strategy based ) on Truth . And the Day when He will say : Be , then that ( Day of Judgment ) will come into being . His Word is the Truth . His will be the Sovereignty on the Day when the Trumpet will be blown ( by Israfil ) . He ( is the One Who ) has the knowledge of the unseen and the seen , and He is All - Wise , All - Aware .

